[manual:intro_0 · Introduction] RISC-V (pronounced "risk-five") is a new instruction-set architecture (ISA) that was originally designed to support computer architecture research and education, but which we now hope will also become a standard free and open architecture for industry implementations. Our goals in defining RISC-V include:
[manual:intro_1 · Introduction] A completely open ISA that is freely available to academia and industry. A real ISA suitable for direct native hardware implementation, not just simulation or binary translation. An ISA that avoids "over-architecting" for a particular microarchitecture style (e.g., microcoded, in-order, decoupled, out-of-order) or implementation technology (e.g., full-custom, ASIC, FPGA), but which allows efficient implementation in any of these. An ISA separated into a small base integer ISA, usable by itself as a base for customized accelerators or for educational purposes, and optional standard extensions, to support general-purpose software development. Support for the IEEE 754-2008 floating-point arithmetic standard. An ISA supporting extensive ISA extensions and specialized variants. Both 32-bit and 64-bit address space variants for applications, operating system kernels, and hardware implementations. An ISA with support for highly parallel multicore or manycore implementations, including heterogeneous multiprocessors. Optional variable-length instructions to both expand available instruction encoding space and to support an optional dense instruction encoding for improved performance, static code size, and energy efficiency. A fully virtualizable ISA to ease hypervisor development. An ISA that simplifies experiments with new privileged architecture designs.
[manual:intro_2 · Introduction] Commentary on our design decisions is formatted as in this paragraph. This non-normative text can be skipped if the reader is only interested in the specification itself.
[manual:intro_3 · Introduction] The name RISC-V was chosen to represent the fifth major RISC ISA design from UC Berkeley (RISC-I, RISC-II, SOAR, and SPUR were the first four). We also pun on the use of the Roman numeral "V" to signify "variations" and "vectors", as support for a range of architecture research, including various data-parallel accelerators, is an explicit goal of the ISA design.
[manual:intro_4 · Introduction] The RISC-V ISA is defined avoiding implementation details as much as possible (although commentary is included on implementation-driven decisions) and should be read as the software-visible interface to a wide variety of implementations rather than as the design of a particular hardware artifact. The RISC-V manual is structured in two volumes. This volume covers the design of the base unprivileged instructions, including optional unprivileged ISA extensions. Unprivileged instructions are those that are generally usable in all privilege modes in all privileged architectures, though behavior might vary depending on privilege mode and privilege architecture. The second volume provides the design of the first ("classic") privileged architecture.
[manual:intro_5 · Introduction] In the unprivileged ISA design, we tried to remove any dependence on particular microarchitectural features, such as cache line size, or on privileged architecture details, such as page translation. This is both for simplicity and to allow maximum flexibility for alternative microarchitectures or alternative privileged architectures.
[manual:intro_6 · Intro › RISC-V Hardware Platform Terminology] A RISC-V hardware platform can contain one or more RISC-V-compatible processing cores together with other non-RISC-V-compatible cores, fixed-function accelerators, various physical memory structures, I/O devices, and an interconnect structure to allow the components to communicate.
[manual:intro_7 · Intro › RISC-V Hardware Platform Terminology] A component is termed a core if it contains an independent instruction fetch unit. A RISC-V-compatible core might support multiple RISC-V-compatible hardware threads, or harts, through multithreading.
[manual:intro_8 · Intro › RISC-V Hardware Platform Terminology] A RISC-V core might have additional specialized instruction-set extensions or an added coprocessor. We use the term coprocessor to refer to a unit that is attached to a RISC-V core and is mostly sequenced by a RISC-V instruction stream, but which contains additional architectural state and instruction-set extensions, and possibly some limited autonomy relative to the primary RISC-V instruction stream.
[manual:intro_9 · Intro › RISC-V Hardware Platform Terminology] We use the term accelerator to refer to either a non-programmable fixed-function unit or a core that can operate autonomously but is specialized for certain tasks. In RISC-V systems, we expect many programmable accelerators will be RISC-V-based cores with specialized instruction-set extensions and/or customized coprocessors. An important class of RISC-V accelerators are I/O accelerators, which offload I/O processing tasks from the main application cores.
[manual:intro_10 · Intro › RISC-V Hardware Platform Terminology] The system-level organization of a RISC-V hardware platform can range from a single-core microcontroller to a many-thousand-node cluster of shared-memory manycore server nodes. Even small systems-on-a-chip might be structured as a hierarchy of multicomputers and/or multiprocessors to modularize development effort or to provide secure isolation between subsystems.
[manual:intro_11 · Intro › RISC-V Software Execution Environments and Harts] The behavior of a RISC-V program depends on the execution environment in which it runs. A RISC-V execution environment interface (EEI) defines the initial state of the program, the number and type of harts in the environment including the privilege modes supported by the harts, the accessibility and attributes of memory and I/O regions, the behavior of all legal instructions executed on each hart (i.e., the ISA is one component of the EEI), and the handling of any interrupts or exceptions raised during execution including environment calls. Examples of EEIs include the Linux application binary interface (ABI), or the RISC-V supervisor binary interface (SBI). The implementation of a RISC-V execution environment can be pure hardware, pure software, or a combination of hardware and software. For example, opcode traps and software emulation can be used to implement functionality not provided in hardware. Examples of execution environment implementations include:
[manual:intro_12 · Intro › RISC-V Software Execution Environments and Harts] "Bare metal" hardware platforms where harts are directly implemented by physical processor threads and instructions have full access to the physical address space. The hardware platform defines an execution environment that begins at power-on reset. RISC-V operating systems that provide multiple user-level execution environments by multiplexing user-level harts onto available physical processor threads and by controlling access to memory via virtual memory. RISC-V hypervisors that provide multiple supervisor-level execution environments for guest operating systems. RISC-V emulators, such as Spike, QEMU, or rv8, which emulate RISC-V harts on an underlying x86 system, and which can provide either a user-level or a supervisor-level execution environment.
[manual:intro_13 · Intro › RISC-V Software Execution Environments and Harts] A bare hardware platform can be considered to define an EEI, where the accessible harts, memory, and other devices populate the environment, and the initial state is that at power-on reset. Generally, most software is designed to use a more abstract interface to the hardware, as more abstract EEIs provide greater portability across different hardware platforms. Often EEIs are layered on top of one another, where one higher-level EEI uses another lower-level EEI.
[manual:intro_14 · Intro › RISC-V Software Execution Environments and Harts] From the perspective of software running in a given execution environment, a hart is a resource that autonomously fetches and executes RISC-V instructions within that execution environment. In this respect, a hart behaves like a hardware thread resource even if time-multiplexed onto real hardware by the execution environment. Some EEIs support the creation and destruction of additional harts, for example, via environment calls to fork new harts.
[manual:intro_15 · Intro › RISC-V Software Execution Environments and Harts] The execution environment is responsible for ensuring the eventual forward progress of each of its harts. For a given hart, that responsibility is suspended while the hart is exercising a mechanism that explicitly waits for an event, such as the wait-for-interrupt instruction defined in; and that responsibility ends if the hart is terminated. The following events constitute forward progress:
[manual:intro_16 · Intro › RISC-V Software Execution Environments and Harts] The retirement of an instruction. A trap, as defined in. Any other event defined by an extension to constitute forward progress.
[manual:intro_17 · Intro › RISC-V Software Execution Environments and Harts] The term hart was introduced in the work on Lithe and to provide a term to represent an abstract execution resource as opposed to a software thread programming abstraction.
[manual:intro_18 · Intro › RISC-V Software Execution Environments and Harts] The important distinction between a hardware thread (hart) and a software thread context is that the software running inside an execution environment is not responsible for causing progress of each of its harts; that is the responsibility of the outer execution environment. So the environment's harts operate like hardware threads from the perspective of the software inside the execution environment.
[manual:intro_19 · Intro › RISC-V Software Execution Environments and Harts] An execution environment implementation might time-multiplex a set of guest harts onto fewer host harts provided by its own execution environment but must do so in a way that guest harts operate like independent hardware threads. In particular, if there are more guest harts than host harts then the execution environment must be able to preempt the guest harts and must not wait indefinitely for guest software on a guest hart to "yield" control of the guest hart.
[manual:intro_20 · Intro › RISC-V ISA Overview] A RISC-V ISA is defined as a base integer ISA, which must be present in any implementation, plus optional extensions to the base ISA. The base integer ISAs are very similar to that of the early RISC processors except with no branch delay slots and with support for optional variable-length instruction encodings. A base is carefully restricted to a minimal set of instructions sufficient to provide a reasonable target for compilers, assemblers, linkers, and operating systems (with additional privileged operations), and so provides a convenient ISA and software toolchain "skeleton" around which more customized processor ISAs can be built.
[manual:intro_21 · Intro › RISC-V ISA Overview] Although it is convenient to speak of the RISC-V ISA, RISC-V is actually a family of related ISAs, of which there are currently four base ISAs. Each base integer instruction set is characterized by the width of the integer registers and the corresponding size of the address space and by the number of integer registers. There are two primary base integer variants, RV32I and RV64I, described in and, which provide 32-bit or 64-bit address spaces respectively. We use the term XLEN to refer to the width of an integer register in bits (either 32 or 64). describes the RV32E and RV64E subset variants of the RV32I or RV64I base instruction sets respectively, which have been added to support small microcontrollers, and which have half the number of integer registers. The base integer instruction sets use a two's-complement representation for signed integer values.
[manual:intro_22 · Intro › RISC-V ISA Overview] Although 64-bit address spaces are a requirement for larger systems, we believe 32-bit address spaces will remain adequate for many embedded and client devices for decades to come and will be desirable to lower memory traffic and energy consumption. In addition, 32-bit address spaces are sufficient for educational purposes. A larger flat 128-bit address space might eventually be required and could be accommodated with a new RV128I base ISA within the existing RISC-V ISA framework.
[manual:intro_23 · Intro › RISC-V ISA Overview] The four base ISAs in RISC-V are treated as distinct base ISAs. A common question is why is there not a single ISA, and in particular, why is RV32I not a strict subset of RV64I? Some earlier ISA designs (SPARC, MIPS) adopted a strict superset policy when increasing address space size to support running existing 32-bit binaries on new 64-bit hardware.
[manual:intro_24 · Intro › RISC-V ISA Overview] The main advantage of explicitly separating base ISAs is that each base ISA can be optimized for its needs without requiring to support all the operations needed for other base ISAs. For example, RV64I can omit instructions and CSRs that are only needed to cope with the narrower registers in RV32I. The RV32I variants can use encoding space otherwise reserved for instructions only required by wider address-space variants.
[manual:intro_25 · Intro › RISC-V ISA Overview] The main disadvantage of not treating the design as a single ISA is that it complicates the hardware needed to emulate one base ISA on another (e.g., RV32I on RV64I). However, differences in addressing and illegal-instruction traps generally mean some mode switch would be required in hardware in any case even with full superset instruction encodings, and the different RISC-V base ISAs are similar enough that supporting multiple versions is relatively low cost. Although some have proposed that the strict superset design would allow legacy 32-bit libraries to be linked with 64-bit code, this is impractical in practice, even with compatible encodings, due to the differences in software calling conventions and system-call interfaces.
[manual:intro_26 · Intro › RISC-V ISA Overview] The RISC-V privileged architecture provides fields in misa to control the unprivileged ISA at each level to support emulating different base ISAs on the same hardware. We note that newer SPARC and MIPS ISA revisions have deprecated support for running 32-bit code unchanged on 64-bit systems.
[manual:intro_27 · Intro › RISC-V ISA Overview] A related question is why there is a different encoding for 32-bit adds in RV32I (ADD) and RV64I (ADDW)? The ADDW opcode could be used for 32-bit adds in RV32I and ADDD for 64-bit adds in RV64I, instead of the existing design which uses the same opcode ADD for 32-bit adds in RV32I and 64-bit adds in RV64I with a different opcode ADDW for 32-bit adds in RV64I. This would also be more consistent with the use of the same LW opcode for 32-bit load in both RV32I and RV64I. The very first versions of RISC-V ISA did have a variant of this alternate design, but the RISC-V design was changed to the current choice in January 2011. Our focus was on supporting 32-bit integers in the 64-bit ISA, not on providing compatibility with the 32-bit ISA, and the motivation was to remove the asymmetry that arose from having not all opcodes in RV32I have a insn:*w[] suffix (e.g., ADDW, but AND not ANDW). In hindsight, this was perhaps not well-justified and a consequence of designing both ISAs at the same time as opposed to adding one later to sit on top of another, and also from a belief we had to fold platform requirements into the ISA spec which would imply that all the RV32I instructions would have been required in RV64I. It is too late to change the encoding now, but this is also of little practical consequence for the reasons stated above.
[manual:intro_28 · Intro › RISC-V ISA Overview] It has been noted we could enable the insn:*w[] variants as an extension to RV32I systems to provide a common encoding across RV64I and a future RV32 variant.
[manual:intro_29 · Intro › RISC-V ISA Overview] RISC-V has been designed to support extensive customization and specialization. Each base integer ISA can be extended with one or more optional instruction-set extensions. An extension may be categorized as either standard, custom, or non-conforming. For this purpose, we divide each RISC-V instruction-set encoding space (and related encoding spaces such as the CSRs) into three disjoint categories: standard, reserved, and custom. Standard extensions and encodings are defined by RISC-V International; any extensions not defined by RISC-V International are non-standard. Each base ISA and its standard extensions use only standard encodings. Reserved encodings are currently not defined but are saved for future standard extensions; once thus used, they become standard encodings. Custom encodings shall never be used for standard extensions and are made available for vendor-specific non-standard extensions. Non-standard extensions are either custom extensions, that use only custom encodings, or non-conforming extensions, that use any standard or reserved encoding. Instruction-set extensions are generally shared but may provide slightly different functionality depending on the base ISA. We have also developed a naming convention for RISC-V base instructions and instruction-set extensions, described in detail in.
[manual:intro_30 · Intro › RISC-V ISA Overview] To support more general software development, a set of standard extensions are defined to provide integer multiply/divide, atomic operations, and single and double-precision floating-point arithmetic. The base integer ISA is named I (prefixed by RV32 or RV64 depending on integer register width), and contains integer computational instructions, integer loads, integer stores, and control-flow instructions. The standard integer multiplication and division extension is named M, and adds instructions to multiply and divide values held in the integer registers. The standard atomic instruction extension, denoted by A, adds instructions that atomically read, modify, and write memory for inter-processor synchronization. The standard single-precision floating-point extension, denoted by F, adds floating-point registers, single-precision computational instructions, and single-precision loads and stores. The standard double-precision floating-point extension, denoted by D, expands the floating-point registers, and adds double-precision computational instructions, loads, and stores. The standard C compressed instruction extension provides narrower 16-bit forms of common instructions.
[manual:intro_31 · Intro › RISC-V ISA Overview] Beyond the base integer ISA and these standard extensions, we believe it is rare that a new instruction will provide a significant benefit for all applications, although it may be very beneficial for a certain domain. As energy efficiency concerns are forcing greater specialization, we believe it is important to simplify the required portion of an ISA specification. Whereas other architectures usually treat their ISA as a single entity, which changes to a new version as instructions are added over time, RISC-V will endeavor to keep the base and each standard extension constant over time, and instead layer new instructions as further optional extensions. For example, the base integer ISAs will continue as fully supported standalone ISAs, regardless of any subsequent extensions.
[manual:intro_32 · Intro › Memory] A RISC-V hart has a single byte-addressable address space of 2^XLEN^ bytes for all memory accesses, where a byte is qty:8[bits]. The memory address space is circular, so that the byte at address 2^XLEN^−1 is adjacent to the byte at address zero. Accordingly, memory address computations done by the hardware ignore overflow and instead wrap around modulo 2^XLEN^.
[manual:intro_33 · Intro › Memory] A word of memory is defined as qty:32[bits] (qty:4[bytes]). Correspondingly, a halfword is qty:16[bits] (qty:2[bytes]), a doubleword is qty:64[bits] (qty:8[bytes]), and a quadword is qty:128[bits] (qty:16[bytes]). Furthermore, a nibble is qty:4[bits]. This specification uses the binary prefixes as defined in IEC 80000-13:2008. For instance, qty:1[KiB] is qty:1024[bytes].
[manual:intro_34 · Intro › Memory] The execution environment determines the mapping of hardware resources into a hart's address space. Different address ranges of a hart's address space may (1) contain main memory, or (2) contain one or more I/O devices. Reads and writes of I/O devices may have visible side effects, but accesses to main memory cannot. Vacant address ranges are not a separate category but can be represented as either main memory or I/O regions that are not accessible. Although it is possible for the execution environment to call everything in a hart's address space an I/O device, it is usually expected that some portion will be specified as main memory.
[manual:intro_35 · Intro › Memory] When a RISC-V platform has multiple harts, the address spaces of any two harts may be entirely the same, or entirely different, or may be partly different but sharing some subset of resources, mapped into the same or different address ranges.
[manual:intro_36 · Intro › Memory] For a purely "bare metal" environment, all harts may see an identical address space, accessed entirely by physical addresses. However, when the execution environment includes an operating system employing address translation, it is common for each hart to be given a virtual address space that is largely or entirely its own.
[manual:intro_37 · Intro › Memory] Executing each RISC-V machine instruction entails one or more memory accesses, subdivided into implicit and explicit accesses. For each instruction executed, an implicit memory read (instruction fetch) is done to obtain the encoded instruction to execute. Many RISC-V instructions perform no further memory accesses beyond instruction fetch. Specific load and store instructions perform an explicit read or write of memory at an address determined by the instruction. The execution environment may dictate that instruction execution performs other implicit memory accesses (such as to implement address translation) beyond those documented for the unprivileged ISA.
[manual:intro_38 · Intro › Memory] The execution environment determines what portions of the address space are accessible for each kind of memory access. For example, the set of locations that can be implicitly read for instruction fetch may or may not have any overlap with the set of locations that can be explicitly read by a load instruction; and the set of locations that can be explicitly written by a store instruction may be only a subset of locations that can be read. Ordinarily, if an instruction attempts to access memory at an inaccessible address, an exception is raised for the instruction.
[manual:intro_39 · Intro › Memory] Except when specified otherwise, implicit reads that do not raise an exception and that have no side effects may occur arbitrarily early and speculatively, even before the machine could possibly prove that the read will be needed. For instance, a valid implementation could attempt to read all of main memory at the earliest opportunity, cache as many fetchable (executable) bytes as possible for later instruction fetches, and avoid reading main memory for instruction fetches ever again. To ensure that certain implicit reads are ordered only after writes to the same memory locations, software must execute specific fence or cache-control instructions defined for this purpose (such as the insnlink:fence.i[] instruction).
[manual:intro_40 · Intro › Memory] The memory accesses (implicit or explicit) made by a hart may appear to occur in a different order as perceived by another hart or by any other agent that can access the same memory. This perceived reordering of memory accesses is always constrained, however, by the applicable memory consistency model. The default memory consistency model for RISC-V is the RISC-V Weak Memory Ordering (RVWMO), defined in and in appendices. Optionally, an implementation may adopt the stronger model of Total Store Ordering, defined as the extlink:ztso[] extension. The execution environment may also add constraints that further limit the perceived reordering of memory accesses. Since the RVWMO model is the weakest model allowed for any RISC-V implementation, software written for this model is compatible with the actual memory consistency rules of all RISC-V implementations. As with implicit reads, software must execute fence or cache-control instructions to ensure specific ordering of memory accesses beyond the requirements of the assumed memory consistency model and execution environment.
[manual:intro_41 · Intro › Base Instruction-Length Encoding] The base RISC-V ISA has fixed-length 32-bit instructions that must be naturally aligned on 32-bit boundaries. However, the standard RISC-V encoding scheme is designed to support ISA extensions with variable-length instructions, where each instruction can be any number of 16-bit instruction parcels in length and parcels are naturally aligned on 16-bit boundaries. The standard compressed ISA extension reduces code size by providing compressed 16-bit instructions and relaxes the alignment constraints to allow all instructions (16- and 32-bit) to be aligned on any 16-bit boundary to improve code density.
[manual:intro_42 · Intro › Base Instruction-Length Encoding] We use the term IALIGN (measured in bits) to refer to the instruction-address alignment constraint the implementation enforces. IALIGN is 32 in the base ISA, but some ISA extensions, including the compressed ISA extension, relax IALIGN to 16. IALIGN may not take on any value other than 16 or 32.
[manual:intro_43 · Intro › Base Instruction-Length Encoding] We use the term ILEN (measured in bits) to refer to the maximum instruction length supported by an implementation, and which is always a multiple of IALIGN. For implementations supporting only a base instruction set, ILEN is 32. Implementations supporting longer instructions have larger values of ILEN.
[manual:intro_44 · Intro › Base Instruction-Length Encoding] All the 32-bit instructions in the base ISA have their lowest two bits set to 11. The optional compressed 16-bit instruction-set extensions have their lowest two bits equal to 00, 01, or 10.
[manual:intro_45 · Intro › Base Instruction-Length Encoding] Given the code size and energy savings of a compressed format, we wanted to build in support for a compressed format to the ISA encoding scheme rather than adding this as an afterthought, but to allow simpler implementations we didn't want to make the compressed format mandatory. We also wanted to optionally allow longer instructions to support experimentation and larger instruction-set extensions. Although our encoding convention required a tighter encoding of the core RISC-V ISA, this has several beneficial effects.
[manual:intro_46 · Intro › Base Instruction-Length Encoding] An implementation of the standard IMAFD ISA need only hold the most-significant qty:30[bits] in instruction caches (a 6.25% saving). On instruction cache refills, any instructions encountered with either low bit clear should be recoded into illegal 30-bit instructions before storing in the cache to preserve illegal-instruction exception behavior.
[manual:intro_47 · Intro › Base Instruction-Length Encoding] Perhaps more importantly, by condensing our base ISA into a subset of the 32-bit instruction word, we leave more space available for non-standard and custom extensions. In particular, the base RV32I ISA uses less than 1/8 of the encoding space in the 32-bit instruction word. An implementation that does not require support for the standard compressed instruction extension can map 3 additional non-conforming 30-bit instruction spaces into the 32-bit fixed-width format, while preserving support for standard {ge}32-bit instruction-set extensions.
[manual:intro_48 · Intro › Base Instruction-Length Encoding] Encodings with bits [15:0] all zeros are defined as illegal instructions. These instructions are considered to be of minimal length: qty:16[bits] if any 16-bit instruction-set extension is present, otherwise qty:32[bits]. The encoding with bits [ILEN-1:0] all ones is also illegal; this instruction is considered to be ILEN bits long.
[manual:intro_49 · Intro › Base Instruction-Length Encoding] We consider it a feature that any length of instruction containing all zero bits is not legal, as this quickly traps erroneous jumps into zeroed memory regions. Similarly, we also reserve the instruction encoding containing all ones to be an illegal instruction, to catch the other common pattern observed with unprogrammed non-volatile memory devices, disconnected memory buses, or broken memory devices.
[manual:intro_50 · Intro › Base Instruction-Length Encoding] Software can rely on a naturally aligned 32-bit word containing zero to act as an illegal instruction on all RISC-V implementations, to be used by software where an illegal instruction is explicitly desired. Defining a corresponding known illegal value for all ones is more difficult due to the variable-length encoding. Software cannot generally use the illegal value of ILEN bits of all 1s, as software might not know ILEN for the eventual target machine (e.g., if software is compiled into a standard binary library used by many different machines). Defining a 32-bit word of all ones as illegal was also considered, as all machines must support a 32-bit instruction size, but this requires the instruction-fetch unit on machines with ILEN >32 report an illegal-instruction exception rather than an access-fault exception when such an instruction borders a protection boundary, complicating variable-instruction-length fetch and decode.
[manual:intro_51 · Intro › Base Instruction-Length Encoding] RISC-V base ISAs have either little-endian or big-endian memory systems, with the privileged architecture further defining bi-endian operation.
[manual:intro_52 · Intro › Base Instruction-Length Encoding] Instructions are stored in memory as a sequence of 16-bit little-endian parcels, regardless of memory system endianness. Parcels forming one instruction are stored at increasing halfword addresses, with the lowest-addressed parcel holding the lowest-numbered bits in the instruction specification.
[manual:intro_53 · Intro › Base Instruction-Length Encoding] We originally chose little-endian byte ordering for the RISC-V memory system because little-endian systems are currently dominant commercially (all x86 systems; iOS, Android, and Windows for ARM). A minor point is that we have also found little-endian memory systems to be more natural for hardware designers. However, certain application areas, such as IP networking, operate on big-endian data structures, and certain legacy code bases have been built assuming big-endian processors, so we have defined big-endian and bi-endian variants of RISC-V.
[manual:intro_54 · Intro › Base Instruction-Length Encoding] We have to fix the order in which instruction parcels are stored in memory, independent of memory system endianness, to ensure that the length-encoding bits always appear first in halfword address order. This allows the length of a variable-length instruction to be quickly determined by an instruction-fetch unit by examining only the first few bits of the first 16-bit instruction parcel.
[manual:intro_55 · Intro › Base Instruction-Length Encoding] We further make the instruction parcels themselves little-endian to decouple the instruction encoding from the memory system endianness altogether. This design benefits both software tooling and bi-endian hardware. Otherwise, for instance, a RISC-V assembler or disassembler would always need to know the intended active endianness, despite that in bi-endian systems, the endianness mode might change dynamically during execution. In contrast, by giving instructions a fixed endianness, it is sometimes possible for carefully written software to be endianness-agnostic even in binary form, much like position-independent code.
[manual:intro_56 · Intro › Base Instruction-Length Encoding] The choice to have instructions be only little-endian does have consequences, however, for RISC-V software that encodes or decodes machine instructions. Big-endian JIT compilers, for example, must swap the byte order when storing to instruction memory.
[manual:intro_57 · Intro › Base Instruction-Length Encoding] Once we had decided to fix on a little-endian instruction encoding, this naturally led to placing the length-encoding bits in the LSB positions of the instruction format to avoid breaking up opcode fields.
[manual:intro_58 · Intro › Exceptions, Traps, and Interrupts] We use the term exception to refer to an unusual condition occurring at run time associated with an instruction in the current RISC-V hart. We use the term interrupt to refer to an external asynchronous event that may cause a RISC-V hart to experience an unexpected transfer of control. We use the term trap to refer to the transfer of control to a trap handler caused by either an exception or an interrupt.
[manual:intro_59 · Intro › Exceptions, Traps, and Interrupts] The instruction descriptions in following chapters describe conditions that can raise an exception during execution. The general behavior of most RISC-V EEIs is that a trap to some handler occurs when an exception is signaled on an instruction (except for floating-point exceptions, which, in the standard floating-point extensions, do not cause traps). The manner in which interrupts are generated, routed to, and enabled by a hart depends on the EEI.
[manual:intro_60 · Intro › Exceptions, Traps, and Interrupts] Our use of "exception" and "trap" is compatible with that in the IEEE 754-2008 floating-point arithmetic standard.
[manual:intro_61 · Intro › Exceptions, Traps, and Interrupts] How traps are handled and made visible to software running on the hart depends on the enclosing execution environment. From the perspective of software running inside an execution environment, traps encountered by a hart at runtime can have four different effects:
[manual:intro_62 · Intro › Exceptions, Traps, and Interrupts] Contained Trap: The trap is visible to, and handled by, software running inside the execution environment. For example, in an EEI providing both supervisor and user mode on harts, an ECALL by a user-mode hart will generally result in a transfer of control to a supervisor-mode handler running on the same hart. Similarly, in the same environment, when a hart is interrupted, an interrupt handler will be run in supervisor mode on the hart. Requested Trap: The trap is a synchronous exception that is an explicit call to the execution environment requesting an action on behalf of software inside the execution environment. An example is a system call. In this case, execution may or may not resume on the hart after the requested action is taken by the execution environment. For example, a system call could remove the hart or cause an orderly termination of the entire execution environment. Invisible Trap: The trap is handled transparently by the execution environment and execution resumes normally after the trap is handled. Examples include emulating missing instructions, handling non-resident page faults in a demand-paged virtual-memory system, or handling device interrupts for a different job in a multiprogrammed machine. In these cases, the software running inside the execution environment is not aware of the trap (we ignore timing effects in these definitions). Fatal Trap: The trap represents a fatal failure and causes the execution environment to terminate execution. Examples include failing a virtual-memory page-protection check or allowing a watchdog timer to expire. Each EEI should define how execution is terminated and reported to an external environment.
[manual:intro_63 · Intro › Exceptions, Traps, and Interrupts] shows the characteristics of each kind of trap.
[manual:intro_64 · Intro › Exceptions, Traps, and Interrupts] ^1^ Termination may be requested + ^2^ Imprecise fatal traps might be observable by software
[manual:intro_65 · Intro › Exceptions, Traps, and Interrupts] The EEI defines for each trap whether it is handled precisely, though the recommendation is to maintain preciseness where possible. Contained and requested traps can be observed to be imprecise by software inside the execution environment. Invisible traps, by definition, cannot be observed to be precise or imprecise by software running inside the execution environment. Fatal traps can be observed to be imprecise by software running inside the execution environment, if known-errorful instructions do not cause immediate termination.
[manual:intro_66 · Intro › Exceptions, Traps, and Interrupts] Because this volume describes unprivileged instructions, traps are rarely mentioned. Architectural means to handle contained traps are defined in the privileged architecture manual, along with other features to support richer EEIs. Unprivileged instructions that are defined solely to cause requested traps are documented here. Invisible traps are, by their nature, out of scope for the unprivileged architecture. Instruction encodings that are not defined here and not defined by some other means may cause a fatal trap.
[manual:intro_67 · Intro › UNSPECIFIED Behaviors and Values] The architecture fully describes what implementations must do and any constraints on what they may do. In cases where the architecture intentionally does not constrain implementations, the term UNSPECIFIED is explicitly used.
[manual:intro_68 · Intro › UNSPECIFIED Behaviors and Values] The term UNSPECIFIED refers to a behavior or value that is intentionally unconstrained. The definition of these behaviors or values is open to extensions, platform standards, or implementations. Extensions, platform standards, or implementation documentation may provide normative content to further constrain cases that the base architecture defines as UNSPECIFIED.
[manual:intro_69 · Intro › UNSPECIFIED Behaviors and Values] Like the base architecture, extensions should fully describe allowable behavior and values and use the term UNSPECIFIED for cases that are intentionally unconstrained. These cases may be constrained or defined by other extensions, platform standards, or implementations.
[manual:naming_0 · ISA Extension Naming Conventions] This chapter describes the RISC-V ISA extension naming scheme that is used to concisely describe the set of instructions present in a hardware implementation, or the set of instructions used by an application binary interface (ABI).
[manual:naming_1 · ISA Extension Naming Conventions] The RISC-V ISA is designed to support a wide variety of implementations with various experimental instruction-set extensions. We have found that an organized naming scheme simplifies software tools and documentation.
[manual:naming_2 · Naming › Base Integer ISA] RISC-V ISA names begin with either RV32I, RV32E, RV64I, or RV64E, indicating the base integer ISA.
[manual:naming_3 · Naming › Instruction-Set Extension Names] Standard ISA extensions are given a name consisting of a single letter. For example, the first four standard extensions to the integer bases are: M for integer multiplication and division, A for atomic memory instructions, F for single-precision floating-point instructions, and D for double-precision floating-point instructions. Any RISC-V instruction-set variant can be succinctly described by concatenating the base integer prefix with the names of the included extensions, e.g., RV64IMAFD.
[manual:naming_4 · Naming › Instruction-Set Extension Names] We have also defined an abbreviation G to represent the IMAFDZicsr_Zifencei base and extensions, as this is intended to represent our standard general-purpose ISA.
[manual:naming_5 · Naming › Instruction-Set Extension Names] Standard extensions to the RISC-V ISA are given other reserved letters: Q for quad-precision floating-point, C for the 16-bit compressed instruction format, and such.
[manual:naming_6 · Naming › Instruction-Set Extension Names] Some ISA extensions depend on the presence of other extensions. For instance, D depends on F and F depends on ZICSR. These dependencies may be implicit in the ISA name. For example, RV32IF is equivalent to RV32IFZicsr, and RV32ID is equivalent to RV32IFD and RV32IFDZicsr.
[manual:naming_7 · Naming › Underscores] Underscores _ may be used to separate ISA extensions to improve readability and to provide disambiguation.
[manual:naming_8 · Naming › Additional Standard Unprivileged Extension Names] Standard unprivileged extensions can also be named by using a single Z followed by an alphanumeric name. The name must end with an alphabetical character. The second letter from the end cannot be numeric if the last letter is p. For example, extlink:zifencei[] names the instruction-fetch fence extension.
[manual:naming_9 · Naming › Additional Standard Unprivileged Extension Names] The first letter following the Z conventionally indicates the most closely related alphabetical extension category, IMAFDQLCBKJTVPH. For the ZFA extension for additional floating-point instructions, for example, the letter f indicates the extension is related to the F extension.
[manual:naming_10 · Naming › Additional Standard Unprivileged Extension Names] NOTE: The ZHINX extension is an exception to this rule, as the extension is not related to the H extension but the ZFH extension.
[manual:naming_11 · Naming › Additional Standard Unprivileged Extension Names] If multiple Z extensions are named, they should be ordered first by category, then alphabetically within a category -- for example, Zicsr_Zifencei_Ztso.
[manual:naming_12 · Naming › Additional Standard Unprivileged Extension Names] All multi-letter extensions, including those with the Z prefix, must be separated from other multi-letter extensions by an underscore: for example, RV32IMACZicsr_Zifencei.
[manual:naming_13 · Naming › User-Level Instruction-Set Extension Names] Standard extensions that extend the user-level architecture are prefixed with the letters SU.
[manual:naming_14 · Naming › User-Level Instruction-Set Extension Names] Standard user-level extensions should be listed after standard unprivileged extensions, and like other multi-letter extensions, must be separated from other multi-letter extensions by an underscore. If multiple user-level extensions are listed, they should be ordered alphabetically.
[manual:naming_15 · Naming › Supervisor-Level Instruction-Set Extension Names] Standard extensions that extend the supervisor-level virtual-memory architecture are prefixed with the letters SV, followed by an alphanumeric name. Other standard extensions that extend the supervisor-level architecture are prefixed with the letters SS, followed by an alphanumeric name. The name must end with an alphabetical character. The second letter from the end cannot be numeric if the last letter is p. These extensions are further defined in Volume II.
[manual:naming_16 · Naming › Supervisor-Level Instruction-Set Extension Names] The extensions SV32, SV39, SV48, and SV59 were defined before the rule against extension names ending in numbers was established.
[manual:naming_17 · Naming › Supervisor-Level Instruction-Set Extension Names] Standard supervisor-level extensions should be listed after standard unprivileged and user-level extensions, and like other multi-letter extensions, must be separated from other multi-letter extensions by an underscore. If multiple supervisor-level extensions are listed, they should be ordered alphabetically.
[manual:naming_18 · Naming › Hypervisor-Level Instruction-Set Extension Names] Standard extensions that extend the hypervisor-level architecture are prefixed with the letters SH.
[manual:naming_19 · Naming › Hypervisor-Level Instruction-Set Extension Names] Standard hypervisor-level extensions should be listed after standard unprivileged, user-level and supervisor-level extensions, and like other multi-letter extensions, must be separated from other multi-letter extensions by an underscore. If multiple hypervisor-level extensions are listed, they should be ordered alphabetically.
[manual:naming_20 · Naming › Hypervisor-Level Instruction-Set Extension Names] NOTE: Many augmentations to the hypervisor-level architecture are more naturally defined as supervisor-level extensions, following the scheme described in the previous section. The SH prefix is used by the few hypervisor-level extensions that have no supervisor-visible effects.
[manual:naming_21 · Naming › Machine-Level Instruction-Set Extension Names] Standard extensions that extend the machine-level architecture are prefixed with the letters SM.
[manual:naming_22 · Naming › Machine-Level Instruction-Set Extension Names] Standard machine-level extensions should be listed after standard lesser-privileged extensions, and like other multi-letter extensions, must be separated from other multi-letter extensions by an underscore. If multiple machine-level extensions are listed, they should be ordered alphabetically.
[manual:naming_23 · Naming › Non-Standard Extension Names] Non-standard extensions are named by using a single X followed by the alphanumeric name. The name must end with an alphabetic character. The second letter from the end cannot be numeric if the last letter is p. For example, XHWACHA names the Hwacha vector-fetch ISA extension.
[manual:naming_24 · Naming › Non-Standard Extension Names] Non-standard extensions must be listed after all standard extensions, and, like other multi-letter extensions, must be separated from other multi-letter extensions by an underscore. If multiple non-standard extensions are listed, they should be ordered alphabetically.
[manual:naming_25 · Naming › Non-Standard Extension Names] For example, an ISA with non-standard extensions Argle and Bargle may be named RV64IZifencei_Xargle_Xbargle.
[manual:naming_26 · Naming › Version Numbers] Recognizing that instruction sets may expand or alter over time, we encode extension version numbers following the extension name. Version numbers are divided into major and minor version numbers, separated by a p. If the minor version is 0, then p0 can be omitted from the version string. To avoid ambiguity, no extension name may end with a number or a p preceded by a number.
[manual:naming_27 · Naming › Version Numbers] Because the P extension for Packed SIMD can be confused for the decimal point in a version number, it must be preceded by an underscore if it follows another extension with a version number. For example, rv32i2p2 means version 2.2 of RV32I, whereas rv32i2_p2 means version 2.0 of RV32I with version 2.0 of the P extension.
[manual:naming_28 · Naming › Version Numbers] Changes in major version numbers imply a loss of backwards compatibility, whereas changes in only the minor version number must be backwards-compatible. For example, the original 64-bit standard ISA defined in release 1.0 of this manual can be written in full as RV64I1p0M1p0A1p0F1p0D1p0, more concisely as RV64I1M1A1F1D1.
[manual:naming_29 · Naming › Version Numbers] We define the default version of ratified standard extensions as follows:
[manual:naming_30 · Naming › Version Numbers] - Version 2 if the extension is one of the following extensions: I, E, M, A, F, D, Q, C, ZICNTR, ZICSR, ZIFENCEI, ZIHINTPAUSE, ZIHPM. - Version 1 otherwise.
[manual:naming_31 · Naming › Canonical Order] In canonical ISA name strings, components appear in the following order:
[manual:naming_32 · Naming › Canonical Order] Base ISA One-letter extensions, MAFDQCBVPH, in this order Z-prefixed extensions Su-prefixed extensions Ss-prefixed extensions Sv-prefixed extensions Sh-prefixed extensions Sm-prefixed extensions X-prefixed extensions
[manual:naming_33 · Naming › Canonical Order] For instance, RV32IMACV is canonical, whereas RV32IMAVC is not.
[manual:zicsr_0 · Zicsr › ZICSR Extension for Control and Status Register (CSR) Instructions] RISC-V defines a separate address space of 4096 Control and Status registers associated with each hart. This chapter defines the full set of CSR instructions that operate on these CSRs.
[manual:zicsr_1 · Zicsr › ZICSR Extension for Control and Status Register (CSR) Instructions] While CSRs are primarily used by the privileged architecture, there are several uses in unprivileged code including for counters and timers, and for floating-point status.
[manual:zicsr_2 · Zicsr › ZICSR Extension for Control and Status Register (CSR) Instructions] The counters and timers are no longer considered mandatory parts of the standard base ISAs, and so the CSR instructions required to access them have been moved out of into this separate chapter.
[manual:zicsr_3 · Zicsr › CSR Instructions] All CSR instructions atomically read-modify-write a single CSR, whose CSR specifier is encoded in the 12-bit csr field of the instruction held in bits 31-20. The immediate forms use a 5-bit zero-extended immediate encoded in the rs1 field.
[manual:zicsr_4 · Zicsr › CSR Instructions] The CSRRW (Atomic Read/Write CSR) instruction atomically swaps values in the CSRs and integer registers. CSRRW reads the old value of the CSR, zero-extends the value to XLEN bits, then writes it to integer register rd. The initial value in rs1 is written to the CSR. If rd=x0, then the instruction shall not read the CSR and shall not cause any of the side effects that might occur on a CSR read.
[manual:zicsr_5 · Zicsr › CSR Instructions] The CSRRS (Atomic Read and Set Bits in CSR) instruction reads the value of the CSR, zero-extends the value to XLEN bits, and writes it to integer register rd. The initial value in integer register rs1 is treated as a bit mask that specifies bit positions to be set in the CSR. Any bit that is high in rs1 will cause the corresponding bit to be set in the CSR, if that CSR bit is writable.
[manual:zicsr_6 · Zicsr › CSR Instructions] The CSRRC (Atomic Read and Clear Bits in CSR) instruction reads the value of the CSR, zero-extends the value to XLEN bits, and writes it to integer register rd. The initial value in integer register rs1 is treated as a bit mask that specifies bit positions to be cleared in the CSR. Any bit that is high in rs1 will cause the corresponding bit to be cleared in the CSR, if that CSR bit is writable.
[manual:zicsr_7 · Zicsr › CSR Instructions] Since CSRRS and CSRRC perform a read-modify-write operation, any bits that read as a different value to their underlying value may be modified by these instructions even if the corresponding bit is not set in rs1. For example, pmpaddr_n[G-1] may have an underlying value of 1 but read as 0. Executing CSRRC or CSRRS to modify a different bit will cause 0 to be read from pmpaddrn_[G-1] and then written back, updating the underlying value to 0.
[manual:zicsr_8 · Zicsr › CSR Instructions] For both CSRRS and CSRRC, if rs1=x0, then the instruction will not write to the CSR at all, and so shall not cause any of the side effects that might otherwise occur on a CSR write, nor raise illegal-instruction exceptions on accesses to read-only CSRs. Both CSRRS and CSRRC always read the addressed CSR and cause any read side effects regardless of rs1 and rd fields. Note that if rs1 specifies a register other than x0, and that register holds a zero value, the instruction will not action any attendant per-field side effects, but will action any side effects caused by writing to the entire CSR.
[manual:zicsr_9 · Zicsr › CSR Instructions] A CSRRW with rs1=x0 will attempt to write zero to the destination CSR.
[manual:zicsr_10 · Zicsr › CSR Instructions] The CSRRWI, CSRRSI, and CSRRCI variants are similar to CSRRW, CSRRS, and CSRRC respectively, except they update the CSR using an XLEN-bit value obtained by zero-extending a 5-bit unsigned immediate (uimm[4:0]) field encoded in the rs1 field instead of a value from an integer register. For CSRRSI and CSRRCI, if the uimm[4:0] field is zero, then these instructions will not write to the CSR, and shall not cause any of the side effects that might otherwise occur on a CSR write, nor raise illegal-instruction exceptions on accesses to read-only CSRs. For CSRRWI, if rd=x0, then the instruction shall not read the CSR and shall not cause any of the side effects that might occur on a CSR read. Both CSRRSI and CSRRCI will always read the CSR and cause any read side effects regardless of rd and rs1 fields.
[manual:zicsr_11 · Zicsr › CSR Instructions] .Conditions determining whether a CSR instruction reads or writes the specified CSR.
[manual:zicsr_12 · Zicsr › CSR Instructions] summarizes the behavior of the CSR instructions with respect to whether they read and/or write the CSR.
[manual:zicsr_13 · Zicsr › CSR Instructions] In addition to side effects that occur as a consequence of reading or writing a CSR, individual fields within a CSR might have side effects when written. CSRRW and CSRRWI action side effects for all such fields within the written CSR. CSRRS, CSRRSI, CSRRC, and CSRRCI only action side effects for fields for which the rs1 or uimm argument has at least one bit set corresponding to that field.
[manual:zicsr_14 · Zicsr › CSR Instructions] As of this writing, no standard CSRs have side effects on field writes. Hence, whether a standard CSR access has any side effects can be determined solely from the opcode.
[manual:zicsr_15 · Zicsr › CSR Instructions] Defining CSRs with side effects on field writes is not recommended.
[manual:zicsr_16 · Zicsr › CSR Instructions] For any event or consequence that occurs due to a CSR having a particular value, if a write to the CSR gives it that value, the resulting event or consequence is said to be an indirect effect of the write. Indirect effects of a CSR write are not considered by the RISC-V ISA to be side effects of that write.
[manual:zicsr_17 · Zicsr › CSR Instructions] An example of side effects for CSR accesses would be if reading from a specific CSR causes a light bulb to turn on, while writing an odd value to the same CSR causes the light to turn off. Assume writing an even value has no effect. In this case, both the read and write have side effects controlling whether the bulb is lit, as this condition is not determined solely from the CSR value. (Note that after writing an odd value to the CSR to turn off the light, then reading to turn the light on, writing again the same odd value causes the light to turn off again. Hence, on the last write, it is not a change in the CSR value that turns off the light.)
[manual:zicsr_18 · Zicsr › CSR Instructions] On the other hand, if a bulb is rigged to light whenever the value of a particular CSR is odd, then turning the light on and off is not considered a side effect of writing to the CSR but merely an indirect effect of such writes.
[manual:zicsr_19 · Zicsr › CSR Instructions] More concretely, the RISC-V privileged architecture specifies that certain combinations of CSR values cause a trap to occur. When an explicit write to a CSR creates the conditions that trigger the trap, the trap is not considered a side effect of the write but merely an indirect effect.
[manual:zicsr_20 · Zicsr › CSR Instructions] Standard CSRs do not have any side effects on reads. Standard CSRs may have side effects on writes. Custom extensions might add CSRs for which accesses have side effects on either reads or writes.
[manual:zicsr_21 · Zicsr › CSR Instructions] Some CSRs, such as the instructions-retired counter, instret, may be modified as side effects of instruction execution. In these cases, if a CSR access instruction reads a CSR, it reads the value prior to the execution of the instruction. If a CSR access instruction writes such a CSR, the explicit write is done instead of the update from the side effect. In particular, a value written to instret by one instruction will be the value read by the following instruction.
[manual:zicsr_22 · Zicsr › CSR Instructions] The assembler pseudoinstruction to read a CSR, CSRR, is encoded as CSRRS. The assembler pseudoinstruction to write a CSR, CSRW, is encoded as CSRRW, while CSRWI, is encoded as CSRRWI.
[manual:zicsr_23 · Zicsr › CSR Instructions] Further assembler pseudoinstructions are defined to set and clear bits in the CSR when the old value is not required: CSRS, CSRC, CSRSI, and CSRCI.
[manual:zicsr_24 · Zicsr › CSR Access Ordering] Each RISC-V hart normally observes its own CSR accesses, including its implicit CSR accesses, as performed in program order. In particular, unless specified otherwise, a CSR access is performed after the execution of any prior instructions in program order whose behavior modifies or is modified by the CSR state and before the execution of any subsequent instructions in program order whose behavior modifies or is modified by the CSR state. Furthermore, an explicit CSR read returns the CSR state before the execution of the instruction, while an explicit CSR write suppresses and overrides any implicit writes or modifications to the same CSR by the same instruction.
[manual:zicsr_25 · Zicsr › CSR Access Ordering] Likewise, any side effects from an explicit CSR access are normally observed to occur synchronously in program order. Unless specified otherwise, the full consequences of any such side effects are observable by the very next instruction, and no consequences may be observed out-of-order by preceding instructions. (Note the distinction made earlier between side effects and indirect effects of CSR writes.)
[manual:zicsr_26 · Zicsr › CSR Access Ordering] For the RVWMO memory consistency model (), CSR accesses are weakly ordered by default, so other harts or devices may observe CSR accesses in an order different from program order. In addition, CSR accesses are not ordered with respect to explicit memory accesses, unless a CSR access modifies the execution behavior of the instruction that performs the explicit memory access or unless a CSR access and an explicit memory access are ordered by either the syntactic dependencies defined by the memory model or the ordering requirements defined in. To enforce ordering in all other cases, software should execute a FENCE instruction between the relevant accesses. For the purposes of the FENCE instruction, CSR read accesses are classified as device input (I), and CSR write accesses are classified as device output (O).
[manual:zicsr_27 · Zicsr › CSR Access Ordering] Informally, the CSR space acts as a weakly ordered memory-mapped I/O region, as defined in. As a result, the order of CSR accesses with respect to all other accesses is constrained by the same mechanisms that constrain the order of memory-mapped I/O accesses to such a region.
[manual:zicsr_28 · Zicsr › CSR Access Ordering] These CSR-ordering constraints are imposed to support ordering main memory and memory-mapped I/O accesses with respect to CSR accesses that are visible to, or affected by, devices or other harts. Examples include the time, cycle, and mcycle CSRs, in addition to CSRs that reflect pending interrupts, like mip and sip. Note that implicit reads of such CSRs (e.g., taking an interrupt because of a change in mip) are also ordered as device input.
[manual:zicsr_29 · Zicsr › CSR Access Ordering] Most CSRs (including, e.g., the fcsr) are not visible to other harts; their accesses can be freely reordered in the global memory order with respect to FENCE instructions without violating this specification.
[manual:zicsr_30 · Zicsr › CSR Access Ordering] The hardware platform may define that accesses to certain CSRs are strongly ordered, as defined in. Accesses to strongly ordered CSRs have stronger ordering constraints with respect to accesses to both weakly ordered CSRs and accesses to memory-mapped I/O regions.
[manual:zicsr_31 · Zicsr › CSR Access Ordering] The rules for the reordering of CSR accesses in the global memory order should probably be moved to concerning the RVWMO memory consistency model.
[manual:rvwmo_0 · Rvwmo › RVWMO Memory Consistency Model] This section defines the base RISC-V memory consistency model. A memory consistency model is a set of rules specifying the values that can be returned by loads of memory. RISC-V uses a memory model called RISC-V Weak Memory Ordering (RVWMO) which is designed to provide flexibility for architects to build high-performance scalable designs while simultaneously supporting a tractable programming model. Under RVWMO, code running on a single hart appears to execute in order from the perspective of other memory instructions in the same hart, but memory instructions from another hart may observe the memory instructions from the first hart being executed in a different order. Therefore, multithreaded code may require explicit synchronization to guarantee ordering between memory instructions from different harts. The base RISC-V ISA provides a FENCE instruction for this purpose, described in, while the ZALRSC and ZAAMO extensions additionally define load-reserved/store-conditional and atomic read-modify-write instructions. The standard ISA extension for total store ordering extlink:ztso[] augments RVWMO with additional rules specific to those extensions.
[manual:rvwmo_1 · Rvwmo › RVWMO Memory Consistency Model] The appendices to this specification provide both axiomatic and operational formalizations of the memory consistency model as well as additional explanatory material.
[manual:rvwmo_2 · Rvwmo › RVWMO Memory Consistency Model] This chapter defines the memory model for regular main memory operations. The interaction of the memory model with I/O memory, instruction fetches (extlink:ziccif[]), FENCE.I, page-table walks, and SFENCE.VMA is not (yet) formalized. Some or all of the above may be formalized in a future revision of this specification.
[manual:rvwmo_3 · Rvwmo › RVWMO Memory Consistency Model] Memory consistency models supporting overlapping memory accesses of different widths simultaneously remain an active area of academic research and are not yet fully understood. The specifics of how memory accesses of different sizes interact under RVWMO are specified to the best of our current abilities, but they are subject to revision should new issues be uncovered.
[manual:rvwmo_4 · Rvwmo › Definition of the RVWMO Memory Model] The RVWMO memory model is defined in terms of the global memory order, a total ordering of the memory operations produced by all harts. In general, a multithreaded program has many different possible executions, with each execution having its own corresponding global memory order.
[manual:rvwmo_5 · Rvwmo › Definition of the RVWMO Memory Model] The global memory order is defined over the primitive load and store operations generated by memory instructions. It is then subject to the constraints defined in the rest of this chapter. Any execution satisfying all of the memory model constraints is a legal execution (as far as the memory model is concerned).
[manual:rvwmo_6 · Rvwmo › Memory Model Primitives] The program order over memory operations reflects the order in which the instructions that generate each load and store are logically laid out in that hart's dynamic instruction stream; i.e., the order in which a simple in-order processor would execute the instructions of that hart.
[manual:rvwmo_7 · Rvwmo › Memory Model Primitives] Memory-accessing instructions give rise to memory operations. A memory operation can be either a load operation, a store operation, or both simultaneously. All memory operations are single-copy atomic: they can never be observed in a partially complete state. Each aligned memory instruction that accesses XLEN or fewer bits gives rise to exactly one memory operation, unless specified otherwise. An aligned AMO gives rise to a single memory operation that is both a load operation and a store operation simultaneously.
[manual:rvwmo_8 · Rvwmo › Memory Model Primitives] Among instructions in RV32GC and RV64GC, the following are exceptions to the rule that an aligned memory instruction gives rise to exactly one memory operation:
[manual:rvwmo_9 · Rvwmo › Memory Model Primitives] An unsuccessful SC instruction does not give rise to any memory operations. Floating-point load and store instructions that access more than XLEN bits (e.g., FLD and FSD in RV32) may each give rise to multiple memory operations.
[manual:rvwmo_10 · Rvwmo › Memory Model Primitives] ISA extensions such as the V extension may give rise to multiple memory operations. However, the memory model for these extensions has not yet been formalized.
[manual:rvwmo_11 · Rvwmo › Memory Model Primitives] A misaligned load or store instruction may be decomposed into a set of component memory operations of any granularity. A floating-point load or store of more than XLEN bits may also be decomposed into a set of component memory operations of any granularity. The memory operations generated by such instructions are not ordered with respect to each other in program order, but they are ordered normally with respect to the memory operations generated by preceding and subsequent instructions in program order. The ZAAMO extension does not require execution environments to support misaligned atomic instructions at all. However, if misaligned atomics are supported via the misaligned atomicity granule PMA, then AMOs within an atomicity granule are not decomposed, nor are loads and stores defined in the base ISAs, nor are loads and stores of no more than XLEN bits defined in the F, D, and Q extensions.
[manual:rvwmo_12 · Rvwmo › Memory Model Primitives] The decomposition of misaligned memory operations down to byte granularity facilitates emulation on implementations that do not natively support misaligned accesses. Such implementations might, for example, simply iterate over the bytes of a misaligned access one by one.
[manual:rvwmo_13 · Rvwmo › Memory Model Primitives] An LR instruction and an SC instruction are said to be paired if the LR precedes the SC in program order and if there are no other LR or SC instructions in between; the corresponding memory operations are said to be paired as well (except in case of a failed SC, where no store operation is generated). The complete list of conditions determining whether an SC must succeed, may succeed, or must fail is defined in extlink:zalrsc[].
[manual:rvwmo_14 · Rvwmo › Memory Model Primitives] Load and store operations may also carry one or more ordering annotations from the following set: acquire-RCpc, acquire-RCsc, release-RCpc, and release-RCsc. An AMO or LR instruction with aq set has an acquire-RCsc annotation. An AMO or SC instruction with rl set has a release-RCsc annotation. An AMO, LR, or SC instruction with both aq and rl set has both acquire-RCsc and release-RCsc annotations.
[manual:rvwmo_15 · Rvwmo › Memory Model Primitives] For convenience, we use the term acquire annotation to refer to an acquire-RCpc annotation or an acquire-RCsc annotation. Likewise, a release annotation refers to a release-RCpc annotation or a release-RCsc annotation. An RCpc annotation refers to an acquire-RCpc annotation or a release-RCpc annotation. An RCsc annotation refers to an acquire-RCsc annotation or a release-RCsc annotation.
[manual:rvwmo_16 · Rvwmo › Memory Model Primitives] In the memory model literature, the term RCpc stands for release consistency with processor-consistent synchronization operations, and the term RCsc stands for release consistency with sequentially consistent synchronization operations.
[manual:rvwmo_17 · Rvwmo › Memory Model Primitives] While there are many different definitions for acquire and release annotations in the literature, in the context of RVWMO these terms are concisely and completely defined by Preserved Program Order rules 5-7.
[manual:rvwmo_18 · Rvwmo › Memory Model Primitives] RCpc annotations are currently only used when implicitly assigned to every memory access per the standard extension extlink:ztso[]. Furthermore, although the ISA does not currently contain native RCpc load-acquire or store-release instructions, the RVWMO model itself is designed to be forwards-compatible with the potential addition of them into the ISA in a future extension.
[manual:rvwmo_19 · Rvwmo › Syntactic Dependencies] The definition of the RVWMO memory model depends in part on the notion of a syntactic dependency, defined as follows.
[manual:rvwmo_20 · Rvwmo › Syntactic Dependencies] In the context of defining dependencies, a register refers either to an entire general-purpose register, some portion of a CSR, or an entire CSR. The granularity at which dependencies are tracked through CSRs is specific to each CSR and is defined in.
[manual:rvwmo_21 · Rvwmo › Syntactic Dependencies] Syntactic dependencies are defined in terms of instructions' source registers, instructions' destination registers, and the way instructions carry a dependency from their source registers to their destination registers. This section provides a general definition of all of these terms; however, provides a complete listing of the specifics for each instruction.
[manual:rvwmo_22 · Rvwmo › Syntactic Dependencies] In general, a register r other than x0 is a source register for an instruction i if any of the following hold:
[manual:rvwmo_23 · Rvwmo › Syntactic Dependencies] In the opcode of i, rs1, rs2, or rs3 is set to r i is a CSR instruction, and in the opcode of i, csr is set to r, unless i is CSRRW or CSRRWI and rd is set to x0 r is a CSR and an implicit source register for i, as defined in r is a CSR that aliases with another source register for i
[manual:rvwmo_24 · Rvwmo › Syntactic Dependencies] Memory instructions also further specify which source registers are address source registers and which are data source registers.
[manual:rvwmo_25 · Rvwmo › Syntactic Dependencies] In general, a register r other than x0 is a destination register for an instruction i if any of the following hold:
[manual:rvwmo_26 · Rvwmo › Syntactic Dependencies] In the opcode of i, rd is set to r i is a CSR instruction, and in the opcode of i, csr is set to r, unless i is CSRRS or CSRRC and rs1 is set to x0 or i is CSRRSI or CSRRCI and uimm[4:0] is set to zero. r is a CSR and an implicit destination register for i, as defined in r is a CSR that aliases with another destination register for i
[manual:rvwmo_27 · Rvwmo › Syntactic Dependencies] Most non-memory instructions carry a dependency from each of their source registers to each of their destination registers. However, there are exceptions to this rule; see.
[manual:rvwmo_28 · Rvwmo › Syntactic Dependencies] Instruction j has a syntactic dependency on instruction i via destination register s of i and source register r of j if either of the following hold:
[manual:rvwmo_29 · Rvwmo › Syntactic Dependencies] s is the same as r, and no instruction program-ordered between i and j has r as a destination register There is an instruction m program-ordered between i and j such that all of the following hold: j has a syntactic dependency on m via destination register q and source register r m has a syntactic dependency on i via destination register s and source register p m carries a dependency from p to q
[manual:rvwmo_30 · Rvwmo › Syntactic Dependencies] Finally, in the definitions that follow, let a and b be two memory operations, and let i and j be the instructions that generate a and b, respectively.
[manual:rvwmo_31 · Rvwmo › Syntactic Dependencies] b has a syntactic address dependency on a if r is an address source register for j and j has a syntactic dependency on i via source register r
[manual:rvwmo_32 · Rvwmo › Syntactic Dependencies] b has a syntactic data dependency on a if b is a store operation, r is a data source register for j, and j has a syntactic dependency on i via source register r
[manual:rvwmo_33 · Rvwmo › Syntactic Dependencies] b has a syntactic control dependency on a if there is an instruction m program-ordered between i and j such that m is a branch or indirect jump and m has a syntactic dependency on i.
[manual:rvwmo_34 · Rvwmo › Syntactic Dependencies] Generally speaking, non-AMO load instructions do not have data source registers, and unconditional non-AMO store instructions do not have destination registers. However, a successful SC instruction is considered to have the register specified in rd as a destination register, and hence it is possible for an instruction to have a syntactic dependency on a successful SC instruction that precedes it in program order.
[manual:rvwmo_35 · Rvwmo › Preserved Program Order] The global memory order for any given execution of a program respects some but not all of each hart’s program order. The subset of program order that must be respected by the global memory order is known as preserved program order.
[manual:rvwmo_36 · Rvwmo › Preserved Program Order] The complete definition of preserved program order is as follows (and note that AMOs are simultaneously both loads and stores): memory operation a precedes memory operation b in preserved program order (and hence also in the global memory order) if a precedes b in program order, a and b both access regular main memory (rather than I/O regions), and any of the following hold:
[manual:rvwmo_37 · Rvwmo › Preserved Program Order] Overlapping-Address Orderings: b is a store, and a and b access overlapping memory addresses a and b are loads, x is a byte read by both a and b, there is no store to x between a and b in program order, and a and b return values for x written by different memory operations a is generated by an AMO or SC instruction, b is a load, and b returns a value written by a Explicit Synchronization: [start=4] There is a FENCE instruction that orders a before b a has an acquire annotation b has a release annotation a and b both have RCsc annotations a is paired with b Syntactic Dependencies: [start=9] b has a syntactic address dependency on a b has a syntactic data dependency on a b is a store, and b has a syntactic control dependency on a Pipeline Dependencies: [start=12] b is a load, and there exists some store m between a and b in program order such that m has an address or data dependency on a, and b returns a value written by m b is a store, and there exists some instruction m between a and b in program order such that m has an address dependency on a
[manual:rvwmo_38 · Rvwmo › Memory Model Axioms] An execution of a RISC-V program obeys the RVWMO memory consistency model only if there exists a global memory order conforming to preserved program order and satisfying the load value axiom, the atomicity axiom, and the progress axiom.
[manual:rvwmo_39 · Rvwmo › Load Value Axiom] Each byte of each load i returns the value written to that byte by the store that is the latest in global memory order among the following stores:
[manual:rvwmo_40 · Rvwmo › Load Value Axiom] Stores that write that byte and that precede i in the global memory order Stores that write that byte and that precede i in program order
[manual:rvwmo_41 · Rvwmo › Atomicity Axiom] If r and w are paired load and store operations generated by aligned LR and SC instructions in a hart h, s is a store to byte x, and r returns a value written by s, then s must precede w in the global memory order, and there can be no store from a hart other than h to byte x following s and preceding w in the global memory order.
[manual:rvwmo_42 · Rvwmo › Atomicity Axiom] The Atomicity Axiom theoretically supports LR/SC pairs of different widths and to mismatched addresses, since implementations are permitted to allow SC operations to succeed in such cases. However, in practice, we expect such patterns to be rare, and their use is discouraged.
[manual:rvwmo_43 · Rvwmo › Progress Axiom] No memory operation may be preceded in the global memory order by an infinite sequence of other memory operations.
[manual:rvwmo_44 · Rvwmo › CSR Dependency Tracking Granularity] .Granularities at which syntactic dependencies are tracked through CSRs
[manual:rvwmo_45 · Rvwmo › CSR Dependency Tracking Granularity] Note: read-only CSRs are not listed, as they do not participate in the definition of syntactic dependencies.
[manual:rvwmo_46 · Rvwmo › Source and Destination Register Listings] This section provides a concrete listing of the source and destination registers for each instruction. These listings are used in the definition of syntactic dependencies in.
[manual:rvwmo_47 · Rvwmo › Source and Destination Register Listings] The term accumulating CSR is used to describe a CSR that is both a source and a destination register, but which carries a dependency only from itself to itself.
[manual:rvwmo_48 · Rvwmo › Source and Destination Register Listings] Instructions carry a dependency from each source register in the "Source Registers" column to each destination register in the "Destination Registers" column, from each source register in the "Source Registers" column to each CSR in the "Accumulating CSRs" column, and from each CSR in the "Accumulating CSRs" column to itself, except where annotated otherwise.
[manual:rvwmo_49 · Rvwmo › Source and Destination Register Listings] - † The instruction does not carry a dependency from any source register to any destination register
[manual:rvwmo_50 · Rvwmo › Source and Destination Register Listings] - ‡ The instruction carries dependencies from source register(s) to destination register(s) as specified
[manual:mm_explanatory_0 · Mm Explanatory › RVWMO Explanatory Material] This section provides more explanation for RVWMO, using more informal language and concrete examples. These are intended to clarify the meaning and intent of the axioms and preserved program order rules. This appendix should be treated as commentary; all normative material is provided in and in the rest of the main body of the ISA specification. All currently known discrepancies are listed in. Any other discrepancies are unintentional.
[manual:mm_explanatory_1 · Mm Explanatory › Why RVWMO?] Memory consistency models fall along a loose spectrum from weak to strong. Weak memory models allow more hardware implementation flexibility and deliver arguably better performance, performance per watt, power, scalability, and hardware verification overheads than strong models, at the expense of a more complex programming model. Strong models provide simpler programming models, but at the cost of imposing more restrictions on the kinds of (non-speculative) hardware optimizations that can be performed in the pipeline and in the memory system, and in turn imposing some cost in terms of power, area overhead, and verification burden.
[manual:mm_explanatory_2 · Mm Explanatory › Why RVWMO?] RISC-V has chosen the RVWMO memory model, a variant of release consistency. This places it in between the two extremes of the memory model spectrum. The RVWMO memory model enables architects to build simple implementations, aggressive implementations, implementations embedded deeply inside a much larger system and subject to complex memory system interactions, or any number of other possibilities, all while simultaneously being strong enough to support programming language memory models at high performance.
[manual:mm_explanatory_3 · Mm Explanatory › Why RVWMO?] To facilitate the porting of code from other architectures, some hardware implementations may choose to implement the Ztso extension, which provides stricter RVTSO ordering semantics by default. Code written for RVWMO is automatically and inherently compatible with RVTSO, but code written assuming RVTSO is not guaranteed to run correctly on RVWMO implementations. In fact, most RVWMO implementations will (and should) simply refuse to run RVTSO-only binaries. Each implementation must therefore choose whether to prioritize compatibility with RVTSO code (e.g., to facilitate porting from x86) or whether to instead prioritize compatibility with other RISC-V cores implementing RVWMO.
[manual:mm_explanatory_4 · Mm Explanatory › Why RVWMO?] Some fences and/or memory ordering annotations in code written for RVWMO may become redundant under RVTSO; the cost that the default of RVWMO imposes on Ztso implementations is the incremental overhead of fetching those fences (e.g., FENCE R,RW and FENCE RW,W) which become no-ops on that implementation. However, these fences must remain present in the code if compatibility with non-Ztso implementations is desired.
[manual:mm_explanatory_5 · Mm Explanatory › Litmus Tests] The explanations in this chapter make use of litmus tests, or small programs designed to test or highlight one particular aspect of a memory model. shows an example of a litmus test with two harts. As a convention for this figure and for all figures that follow in this chapter, we assume that s0-s2 are pre-set to the same value in all harts and that s0 holds the address labeled x, s1 holds y, and s2 holds z, where x, y, and z are disjoint memory locations aligned to 8 byte boundaries. All other registers and all referenced memory locations are presumed to be initialized to zero. Each figure shows the litmus test code on the left, and a visualization of one particular valid or invalid execution on the right.
[manual:mm_explanatory_6 · Mm Explanatory › Litmus Tests] [float="center",align="center",cols="1a,.^1a",frame="none",grid="none",options="noheader"].A sample litmus test and one forbidden execution (a0=1).
[manual:mm_explanatory_7 · Mm Explanatory › Litmus Tests] Litmus tests are used to understand the implications of the memory model in specific concrete situations. For example, in the litmus test of, the final value of a0 in the first hart can be either 2, 4, or 5, depending on the dynamic interleaving of the instruction stream from each hart at runtime. However, in this example, the final value of a0 in Hart 0 will never be 1 or 3; intuitively, the value 1 will no longer be visible at the time the load executes, and the value 3 will not yet be visible by the time the load executes. We analyze this test and many others below.
[manual:mm_explanatory_8 · Mm Explanatory › Litmus Tests] <<<.A key for the litmus test diagrams drawn in this appendix
[manual:mm_explanatory_9 · Mm Explanatory › Litmus Tests] The diagram shown to the right of each litmus test shows a visual representation of the particular execution candidate being considered. These diagrams use a notation that is common in the memory model literature for constraining the set of possible global memory orders that could produce the execution in question. It is also the basis for the herd models presented in. This notation is explained in. Of the listed relations, rf edges between harts, co edges, fr edges, and ppo edges directly constrain the global memory order (as do fence, addr, data, and some ctrl edges, via ppo). Other edges (such as intra-hart rf edges) are informative but do not constrain the global memory order.
[manual:mm_explanatory_10 · Mm Explanatory › Litmus Tests] For example, in, a0=1 could occur only if one of the following were true:
[manual:mm_explanatory_11 · Mm Explanatory › Litmus Tests] (b) appears before (a) in global memory order (and in the coherence order co). However, this violates RVWMO PPO rule ppo:->st. The co edge from (b) to (a) highlights this contradiction. (a) appears before (b) in global memory order (and in the coherence order co). However, in this case, the Load Value Axiom would be violated, because (a) is not the latest matching store prior to (c) in program order. The fr edge from (c) to (b) highlights this contradiction.
[manual:mm_explanatory_12 · Mm Explanatory › Litmus Tests] Since neither of these scenarios satisfies the RVWMO axioms, the outcome a0=1 is forbidden.
[manual:mm_explanatory_13 · Mm Explanatory › Litmus Tests] Beyond what is described in this appendix, a suite of more than seven thousand litmus tests is available at https://github.com/litmus-tests/litmus-tests-riscv.
[manual:mm_explanatory_14 · Mm Explanatory › Litmus Tests] The litmus tests repository also provides instructions on how to run the litmus tests on RISC-V hardware and how to compare the results with the operational and axiomatic models.
[manual:mm_explanatory_15 · Mm Explanatory › Litmus Tests] In the future, we expect to adapt these memory model litmus tests for use as part of the RISC-V compliance test suite as well.
[manual:mm_explanatory_16 · Mm Explanatory › Explaining the RVWMO Rules] In this section, we provide explanation and examples for all of the RVWMO rules and axioms.
[manual:mm_explanatory_17 · Mm Explanatory › Preserved Program Order and Global Memory Order] Preserved program order represents the subset of program order that must be respected within the global memory order. Conceptually, events from the same hart that are ordered by preserved program order must appear in that order from the perspective of other harts and/or observers. Events from the same hart that are not ordered by preserved program order, on the other hand, may appear reordered from the perspective of other harts and/or observers.
[manual:mm_explanatory_18 · Mm Explanatory › Preserved Program Order and Global Memory Order] Informally, the global memory order represents the order in which loads and stores perform. The formal memory model literature has moved away from specifications built around the concept of performing, but the idea is still useful for building up informal intuition. A load is said to have performed when its return value is determined. A store is said to have performed not when it has executed inside the pipeline, but rather only when its value has been propagated to globally visible memory. In this sense, the global memory order also represents the contribution of the coherence protocol and/or the rest of the memory system to interleave the (possibly reordered) memory accesses being issued by each hart into a single total order agreed upon by all harts.
[manual:mm_explanatory_19 · Mm Explanatory › Preserved Program Order and Global Memory Order] The order in which loads perform does not always directly correspond to the relative age of the values those two loads return. In particular, a load b may perform before another load a to the same address (i.e., b may execute before a, and b may appear before a in the global memory order), but a may nevertheless return an older value than b. This discrepancy captures (among other things) the reordering effects of buffering placed between the core and memory. For example, b may have returned a value from a store in the store buffer, while a may have ignored that younger store and read an older value from memory instead. To account for this, at the time each load performs, the value it returns is determined by the load value axiom, not just strictly by determining the most recent store to the same address in the global memory order, as described below.
[manual:mm_explanatory_20 · Mm Explanatory › Load value axiom] : Each byte of each load i returns the value written to that byte by the store that is the latest in global memory order among the following stores:
[manual:mm_explanatory_21 · Mm Explanatory › Load value axiom] Stores that write that byte and that precede i in the global memory order Stores that write that byte and that precede i in program order
[manual:mm_explanatory_22 · Mm Explanatory › Load value axiom] Preserved program order is not required to respect the ordering of a store followed by a load to an overlapping address. This complexity arises due to the ubiquity of store buffers in nearly all implementations. Informally, the load may perform (return a value) by forwarding from the store while the store is still in the store buffer, and hence before the store itself performs (writes back to globally visible memory). Any other hart will therefore observe the load as performing before the store.
[manual:mm_explanatory_23 · Mm Explanatory › Load value axiom] Consider the. When running this program on an implementation with store buffers, it is possible to arrive at the final outcome a0=1, a1=0, a2=1, a3=0 as follows:
[manual:mm_explanatory_24 · Mm Explanatory › Load value axiom] .A store buffer forwarding litmus test (outcome permitted) [float="center",align="center",cols=".^1a,.^1a",frame="none",grid="none",options="noheader"]
[manual:mm_explanatory_25 · Mm Explanatory › Load value axiom] (a) executes and enters the first hart's private store buffer (b) executes and forwards its return value 1 from (a) in the store buffer (c) executes since all previous loads (i.e., (b)) have completed (d) executes and reads the value 0 from memory (e) executes and enters the second hart's private store buffer (f) executes and forwards its return value 1 from (e) in the store buffer (g) executes since all previous loads (i.e., (f)) have completed (h) executes and reads the value 0 from memory (a) drains from the first hart's store buffer to memory (e) drains from the second hart's store buffer to memory
[manual:mm_explanatory_26 · Mm Explanatory › Load value axiom] Therefore, the memory model must be able to account for this behavior.
[manual:mm_explanatory_27 · Mm Explanatory › Load value axiom] To put it another way, suppose the definition of preserved program order did include the following hypothetical rule: memory access a precedes memory access b in preserved program order (and hence also in the global memory order) if a precedes b in program order and a and b are accesses to the same memory location, a is a write, and b is a read. Call this "Rule X". Then we get the following:
[manual:mm_explanatory_28 · Mm Explanatory › Load value axiom] (a) precedes (b): by rule X (b) precedes (d): by rule 4 (d) precedes (e): by the load value axiom. Otherwise, if (e) preceded (d), then (d) would be required to return the value 1. (This is a perfectly legal execution; it's just not the one in question) (e) precedes (f): by rule X (f) precedes (h): by rule 4 (h) precedes (a): by the load value axiom, as above.
[manual:mm_explanatory_29 · Mm Explanatory › Load value axiom] The global memory order must be a total order and cannot be cyclic, because a cycle would imply that every event in the cycle happens before itself, which is impossible. Therefore, the execution proposed above would be forbidden, and hence the addition of rule X would forbid implementations with store buffer forwarding, which would clearly be undesirable.
[manual:mm_explanatory_30 · Mm Explanatory › Load value axiom] Nevertheless, even if (b) precedes (a) and/or (f) precedes (e) in the global memory order, the only sensible possibility in this example is for (b) to return the value written by (a), and likewise for (f) and (e). This combination of circumstances is what leads to the second option in the definition of the load value axiom. Even though (b) precedes (a) in the global memory order, (a) will still be visible to (b) by virtue of sitting in the store buffer at the time (b) executes. Therefore, even if (b) precedes (a) in the global memory order, (b) should return the value written by (a) because (a) precedes (b) in program order. Likewise for (e) and (f).
[manual:mm_explanatory_31 · Mm Explanatory › Load value axiom] .Key for test that highlights the behavior of store buffers [float="center",align="center",cols=".^1a,.^1a",frame="none",grid="none",options="noheader"].The "PPOCA" store buffer forwarding litmus test (outcome permitted)
[manual:mm_explanatory_32 · Mm Explanatory › Load value axiom] Another test that highlights the behavior of store buffers is shown in. In this example, (d) is ordered before (e) because of the control dependency, and (f) is ordered before (g) because of the address dependency. However, (e) is not necessarily ordered before (f), even though (f) returns the value written by (e). This could correspond to the following sequence of events:
[manual:mm_explanatory_33 · Mm Explanatory › Load value axiom] (e) executes speculatively and enters the second hart's private store buffer (but does not drain to memory) (f) executes speculatively and forwards its return value 1 from (e) in the store buffer (g) executes speculatively and reads the value 0 from memory (a) executes, enters the first hart's private store buffer, and drains to memory (b) executes and retires (c) executes, enters the first hart's private store buffer, and drains to memory (d) executes and reads the value 1 from memory (e), (f), and (g) commit, since the speculation turned out to be correct (e) drains from the store buffer to memory
[manual:mm_explanatory_34 · Mm Explanatory › Atomicity axiom] Atomicity Axiom (for Aligned Atomics): If r and w are paired load and store operations generated by aligned LR and SC instructions in a hart h, s is a store to byte x, and r returns a value written by s, then s must precede w in the global memory order, and there can be no store from a hart other than h to byte x following s and preceding w in the global memory order.
[manual:mm_explanatory_35 · Mm Explanatory › Atomicity axiom] The RISC-V architecture decouples the notion of atomicity from the notion of ordering. Unlike architectures such as TSO, RISC-V atomics under RVWMO do not impose any ordering requirements by default. Ordering semantics are only guaranteed by the PPO rules that otherwise apply.
[manual:mm_explanatory_36 · Mm Explanatory › Atomicity axiom] RISC-V contains two types of atomics: AMOs and LR/SC pairs. These conceptually behave differently, in the following way. LR/SC behave as if the old value is brought up to the core, modified, and written back to memory, all while a reservation is held on that memory location. AMOs on the other hand conceptually behave as if they are performed directly in memory. AMOs are therefore inherently atomic, while LR/SC pairs are atomic in the slightly different sense that the memory location in question will not be modified by another hart during the time the original hart holds the reservation.
[manual:mm_explanatory_37 · Mm Explanatory › Atomicity axiom] [frame=none].In all four (independent) instances, the final store-conditional instruction is permitted but not guaranteed to succeed. |==== |(a) lr.d a0, 0(s0) |(a) lr.d a0, 0(s0) |(a) lr.w a0, 0(s0) |(a) lr.w a0, 0(s0)
[manual:mm_explanatory_38 · Mm Explanatory › Atomicity axiom] The atomicity axiom forbids stores from other harts from being interleaved in global memory order between an LR and the SC paired with that LR. The atomicity axiom does not forbid loads from being interleaved between the paired operations in program order or in the global memory order, nor does it forbid stores from the same hart or stores to non-overlapping locations from appearing between the paired operations in either program order or in the global memory order. For example, the SC instructions in may (but are not guaranteed to) succeed. None of those successes would violate the atomicity axiom, because the intervening non-conditional stores are from the same hart as the paired load-reserved and store-conditional instructions. This way, a memory system that tracks memory accesses at cache line granularity (and which therefore will see the four snippets of as identical) will not be forced to fail a store-conditional instruction that happens to (falsely) share another portion of the same cache line as the memory location being held by the reservation.
[manual:mm_explanatory_39 · Mm Explanatory › Atomicity axiom] The atomicity axiom also technically supports cases in which the LR and SC touch different addresses and/or use different access sizes; however, use cases for such behaviors are expected to be rare in practice. Likewise, scenarios in which stores from the same hart between an LR/SC pair actually overlap the memory location(s) referenced by the LR or SC are expected to be rare compared to scenarios where the intervening store may simply fall onto the same cache line.
[manual:mm_explanatory_40 · Mm Explanatory › Progress axiom] Progress Axiom: No memory operation may be preceded in the global memory order by an infinite sequence of other memory operations.
[manual:mm_explanatory_41 · Mm Explanatory › Progress axiom] The progress axiom ensures a minimal forward progress guarantee. It ensures that stores from one hart will eventually be made visible to other harts in the system in a finite amount of time, and that loads from other harts will eventually be able to read those values (or successors thereof). Without this rule, it would be legal, for example, for a spinlock to spin infinitely on a value, even with a store from another hart unlocking the spinlock.
[manual:mm_explanatory_42 · Mm Explanatory › Progress axiom] The progress axiom is intended not to impose any other notion of fairness, latency, or quality of service onto the harts in a RISC-V implementation. Any stronger notions of fairness are up to the rest of the ISA and/or up to the platform and/or device to define and implement.
[manual:mm_explanatory_43 · Mm Explanatory › Progress axiom] The forward progress axiom will in almost all cases be naturally satisfied by any standard cache coherence protocol. Implementations with non-coherent caches may have to provide some other mechanism to ensure the eventual visibility of all stores (or successors thereof) to all harts.
[manual:mm_explanatory_44 · Mm Explanatory › Overlapping-Address Orderings (Rules 1-3)] Rule 1: b is a store, and a and b access overlapping memory addresses
[manual:mm_explanatory_45 · Mm Explanatory › Overlapping-Address Orderings (Rules 1-3)] Rule 2: a and b are loads, x is a byte read by both a and b, there is no store to x between a and b in program order, and a and b return values for x written by different memory operations
[manual:mm_explanatory_46 · Mm Explanatory › Overlapping-Address Orderings (Rules 1-3)] Rule 3: a is generated by an AMO or SC instruction, b is a load, and b returns a value written by a
[manual:mm_explanatory_47 · Mm Explanatory › Overlapping-Address Orderings (Rules 1-3)] Same-address orderings where the latter is a store are straightforward: a load or store can never be reordered with a later store to an overlapping memory location. From a microarchitecture perspective, generally speaking, it is difficult or impossible to undo a speculatively reordered store if the speculation turns out to be invalid, so such behavior is simply disallowed by the model. Same-address orderings from a store to a later load, on the other hand, do not need to be enforced. As discussed in, this reflects the observable behavior of implementations that forward values from buffered stores to later loads.
[manual:mm_explanatory_48 · Mm Explanatory › Overlapping-Address Orderings (Rules 1-3)] Same-address load-load ordering requirements are far more subtle. The basic requirement is that a younger load must not return a value that is older than a value returned by an older load in the same hart to the same address. This is often known as "CoRR" (Coherence for Read-Read pairs), or as part of a broader "coherence" or "sequential consistency per location" requirement. Some architectures in the past have relaxed same-address load-load ordering, but in hindsight this is generally considered to complicate the programming model too much, and so RVWMO requires CoRR ordering to be enforced. However, because the global memory order corresponds to the order in which loads perform rather than the ordering of the values being returned, capturing CoRR requirements in terms of the global memory order requires a bit of indirection.
[manual:mm_explanatory_49 · Mm Explanatory › Overlapping-Address Orderings (Rules 1-3)] Consider the litmus test of, which is one particular instance of the more general "fri-rfi" pattern. The term "fri-rfi" refers to the sequence (d), (e), (f): (d) "from-reads" (i.e., reads from an earlier write than) (e) which is the same hart, and (f) reads from (e) which is in the same hart.
[manual:mm_explanatory_50 · Mm Explanatory › Overlapping-Address Orderings (Rules 1-3)] From a microarchitectural perspective, outcome a0=1, a1=2, a2=0 is legal (as are various other less subtle outcomes). Intuitively, the following would produce the outcome in question:
[manual:mm_explanatory_51 · Mm Explanatory › Overlapping-Address Orderings (Rules 1-3)] (d) stalls (for whatever reason; perhaps it's stalled waiting for some other preceding instruction) (e) executes and enters the store buffer (but does not yet drain to memory) (f) executes and forwards from (e) in the store buffer (g), (h), and (i) execute (a) executes and drains to memory, (b) executes, and (c) executes and drains to memory (d) unstalls and executes (e) drains from the store buffer to memory
[manual:mm_explanatory_52 · Mm Explanatory › Overlapping-Address Orderings (Rules 1-3)] This corresponds to a global memory order of (f), (i), (a), (c), (d), (e). Note that even though (f) performs before (d), the value returned by (f) is newer than the value returned by (d). Therefore, this execution is legal and does not violate the CoRR requirements.
[manual:mm_explanatory_53 · Mm Explanatory › Overlapping-Address Orderings (Rules 1-3)] Likewise, if two back-to-back loads return the values written by the same store, then they may also appear out-of-order in the global memory order without violating CoRR. Note that this is not the same as saying that the two loads return the same value, since two different stores may write the same value.
[manual:mm_explanatory_54 · Mm Explanatory › Overlapping-Address Orderings (Rules 1-3)] Consider the litmus test of. The outcome a0=1, a1=v, a2=v, a3=0 (where v is some value written by another hart) can be observed by allowing (g) and (h) to be reordered. This might be done speculatively, and the speculation can be justified by the microarchitecture (e.g., by snooping for cache invalidations and finding none) because replaying (h) after (g) would return the value written by the same store anyway. Hence assuming a1 and a2 would end up with the same value written by the same store anyway, (g) and (h) can be legally reordered. The global memory order corresponding to this execution would be (h),(k),(a),(c),(d),(g).
[manual:mm_explanatory_55 · Mm Explanatory › Overlapping-Address Orderings (Rules 1-3)] Executions of the test in in which a1 does not equal a2 do in fact require that (g) appears before (h) in the global memory order. Allowing (h) to appear before (g) in the global memory order would in that case result in a violation of CoRR, because then (h) would return an older value than that returned by (g). Therefore, rule 2 forbids this CoRR violation from occurring. As such, rule 2 strikes a careful balance between enforcing CoRR in all cases while simultaneously being weak enough to permit "RSW" and "fri-rfi" patterns that commonly appear in real microarchitectures.
[manual:mm_explanatory_56 · Mm Explanatory › Overlapping-Address Orderings (Rules 1-3)] There is one more overlapping-address rule: rule 3 simply states that a value cannot be returned from an AMO or SC to a subsequent load until the AMO or SC has (in the case of the SC, successfully) performed globally. This follows somewhat naturally from the conceptual view that both AMOs and SC instructions are meant to be performed atomically in memory. However, notably, rule 3 states that hardware may not even non-speculatively forward the value being stored by an AMOSWAP to a subsequent load, even though for AMOSWAP that store value is not actually semantically dependent on the previous value in memory, as is the case for the other AMOs. The same holds true even when forwarding from SC store values that are not semantically dependent on the value returned by the paired LR.
[manual:mm_explanatory_57 · Mm Explanatory › Overlapping-Address Orderings (Rules 1-3)] The three PPO rules above also apply when the memory accesses in question only overlap partially. This can occur, for example, when accesses of different sizes are used to access the same object. Note also that the base addresses of two overlapping memory operations need not necessarily be the same for two memory accesses to overlap. When misaligned memory accesses are being used, the overlapping-address PPO rules apply to each of the component memory accesses independently.
[manual:mm_explanatory_58 · Mm Explanatory › Fences (Rule 4)] Rule 4: There is a FENCE instruction that orders a before b
[manual:mm_explanatory_59 · Mm Explanatory › Fences (Rule 4)] By default, the FENCE instruction ensures that all memory accesses from instructions preceding the fence in program order (the "predecessor set") appear earlier in the global memory order than memory accesses from instructions appearing after the fence in program order (the "successor set"). However, fences can optionally further restrict the predecessor set and/or the successor set to a smaller set of memory accesses in order to provide some speedup. Specifically, fences have PR, PW, SR, and SW bits which restrict the predecessor and/or successor sets. The predecessor set includes loads (resp. stores) if and only if PR (resp. PW) is set. Similarly, the successor set includes loads (resp. stores) if and only if SR (resp. SW) is set.
[manual:mm_explanatory_60 · Mm Explanatory › Fences (Rule 4)] The FENCE encoding currently has nine non-trivial combinations of the four bits PR, PW, SR, and SW, plus one extra encoding FENCE.TSO which facilitates mapping of "acquire+release" or RVTSO semantics. The remaining seven combinations have empty predecessor and/or successor sets and hence are no-ops. Of the ten non-trivial options, six are commonly used in practice:
[manual:mm_explanatory_61 · Mm Explanatory › Fences (Rule 4)] FENCE RW,RW FENCE.TSO FENCE RW,W FENCE R,RW FENCE R,R FENCE W,W
[manual:mm_explanatory_62 · Mm Explanatory › Fences (Rule 4)] FENCE instructions using other combinations of PR, PW, SR, and SW are not normally used in the Linux or C++ memory models but are otherwise well defined.
[manual:mm_explanatory_63 · Mm Explanatory › Fences (Rule 4)] Finally, we note that since RISC-V uses a multi-copy atomic memory model, programmers can reason about fences bits in a thread-local manner. Fences in RISC-V are not cumulative, as they are in some non-multi-copy-atomic memory models.
[manual:mm_explanatory_64 · Mm Explanatory › Explicit Synchronization (Rules 5-8)] Rule 7: a and b both have RCsc annotations
[manual:mm_explanatory_65 · Mm Explanatory › Explicit Synchronization (Rules 5-8)] An acquire operation, as would be used at the start of a critical section, requires all memory operations following the acquire in program order to also follow the acquire in the global memory order. This ensures, for example, that all loads and stores inside the critical section are up to date with respect to the synchronization variable being used to protect it. Acquire ordering can be enforced in one of two ways: with an acquire annotation, which enforces ordering with respect to just the synchronization variable itself, or with a FENCE R,RW, which enforces ordering with respect to all previous loads.
[manual:mm_explanatory_66 · Mm Explanatory › Explicit Synchronization (Rules 5-8)] Consider Example 1. Because this example uses aq, the loads and stores in the critical section are guaranteed to appear in the global memory order after the AMOSWAP used to acquire the lock. However, assuming a0, a1, and a2 point to different memory locations, the loads and stores in the critical section may or may not appear after the "Arbitrary unrelated load" at the beginning of the example in the global memory order.
[manual:mm_explanatory_67 · Mm Explanatory › Explicit Synchronization (Rules 5-8)] Now, consider the alternative in Example 2. In this case, even though the AMOSWAP does not enforce ordering with an aq bit, the fence nevertheless enforces that the acquire AMOSWAP appears earlier in the global memory order than all loads and stores in the critical section. Note, however, that in this case, the fence also enforces additional orderings: it also requires that the "Arbitrary unrelated load" at the start of the program appears earlier in the global memory order than the loads and stores of the critical section. (This particular fence does not, however, enforce any ordering with respect to the "Arbitrary unrelated store" at the start of the snippet.) In this way, fence-enforced orderings are slightly coarser than orderings enforced by.aq.
[manual:mm_explanatory_68 · Mm Explanatory › Explicit Synchronization (Rules 5-8)] Release orderings work exactly the same as acquire orderings, just in the opposite direction. Release semantics require all loads and stores preceding the release operation in program order to also precede the release operation in the global memory order. This ensures, for example, that memory accesses in a critical section appear before the lock-releasing store in the global memory order. Just as for acquire semantics, release semantics can be enforced using release annotations or with a FENCE RW,W operation. Using the same examples, the ordering between the loads and stores in the critical section and the "Arbitrary unrelated store" at the end of the code snippet is enforced only by the FENCE RW,W in Example 2, not by the rl in Example 1.
[manual:mm_explanatory_69 · Mm Explanatory › Explicit Synchronization (Rules 5-8)] With RCpc annotations alone, store-release-to-load-acquire ordering is not enforced. This facilitates the porting of code written under the TSO and/or RCpc memory models. To enforce store-release-to-load-acquire ordering, the code must use store-release-RCsc and load-acquire-RCsc operations so that PPO rule 7 applies. RCpc alone is sufficient for many use cases in C/C\++ but is insufficient for many other use cases in C/C++, Java, and Linux, to name just a few examples; see Memory Porting for details.
[manual:mm_explanatory_70 · Mm Explanatory › Explicit Synchronization (Rules 5-8)] PPO rule 8 indicates that an SC must appear after its paired LR in the global memory order. This will follow naturally from the common use of LR/SC to perform an atomic read-modify-write operation due to the inherent data dependency. However, PPO rule 8 also applies even when the value being stored does not syntactically depend on the value returned by the paired LR.
[manual:mm_explanatory_71 · Mm Explanatory › Explicit Synchronization (Rules 5-8)] Lastly, we note that, as with fences, ordering annotations are not cumulative.
[manual:mm_explanatory_72 · Mm Explanatory › Syntactic Dependencies (Rules 9-11)] Rule 9: b has a syntactic address dependency on a
[manual:mm_explanatory_73 · Mm Explanatory › Syntactic Dependencies (Rules 9-11)] Rule 10: b has a syntactic data dependency on a
[manual:mm_explanatory_74 · Mm Explanatory › Syntactic Dependencies (Rules 9-11)] Rule 11: b is a store, and b has a syntactic control dependency on a
[manual:mm_explanatory_75 · Mm Explanatory › Syntactic Dependencies (Rules 9-11)] Dependencies from a load to a later memory operation in the same hart are respected by the RVWMO memory model. The Alpha memory model was notable for choosing not to enforce the ordering of such dependencies, but most modern hardware and software memory models consider allowing dependent instructions to be reordered too confusing and counterintuitive. Furthermore, modern code sometimes intentionally uses such dependencies as a particularly lightweight ordering enforcement mechanism.
[manual:mm_explanatory_76 · Mm Explanatory › Syntactic Dependencies (Rules 9-11)] The terms in work as follows. Instructions are said to carry dependencies from their source register(s) to their destination register(s) whenever the value written into each destination register is a function of the source register(s). For most instructions, this means that the destination register(s) carry a dependency from all source register(s). However, there are a few notable exceptions. In the case of memory instructions, the value written into the destination register ultimately comes from the memory system rather than from the source register(s) directly, and so this breaks the chain of dependencies carried from the source register(s). In the case of unconditional jumps, the value written into the destination register comes from the current pc (which is never considered a source register by the memory model), and so likewise, JALR (the only jump with a source register) does not carry a dependency from rs1 to rd.
[manual:mm_explanatory_77 · Mm Explanatory › Syntactic Dependencies (Rules 9-11)] .(c) has a syntactic dependency on both (a) and (b) via fflags, a destination register that both (a) and (b) implicitly accumulate into [.text-center,source%linenums,asm]
[manual:mm_explanatory_78 · Mm Explanatory › Syntactic Dependencies (Rules 9-11)] The notion of accumulating into a destination register rather than writing into it reflects the behavior of CSRs such as fflags. In particular, an accumulation into a register does not clobber any previous writes or accumulations into the same register. For example, in, (c) has a syntactic dependency on both (a) and (b).
[manual:mm_explanatory_79 · Mm Explanatory › Syntactic Dependencies (Rules 9-11)] Like other modern memory models, the RVWMO memory model uses syntactic rather than semantic dependencies. In other words, this definition depends on the identities of the registers being accessed by different instructions, not the actual contents of those registers. This means that an address, control, or data dependency must be enforced even if the calculation could seemingly be optimized away. This choice ensures that RVWMO remains compatible with code that uses these false syntactic dependencies as a lightweight ordering mechanism.
[manual:mm_explanatory_80 · Mm Explanatory › Syntactic Dependencies (Rules 9-11)] For example, there is a syntactic address dependency from the memory operation generated by the first instruction to the memory operation generated by the last instruction in, even though a1 XOR a1 is zero and hence has no effect on the address accessed by the second load.
[manual:mm_explanatory_81 · Mm Explanatory › Syntactic Dependencies (Rules 9-11)] The benefit of using dependencies as a lightweight synchronization mechanism is that the ordering enforcement requirement is limited only to the specific two instructions in question. Other non-dependent instructions may be freely reordered by aggressive implementations. One alternative would be to use a load-acquire, but this would enforce ordering for the first load with respect to all subsequent instructions. Another would be to use a FENCE R,R, but this would include all previous and all subsequent loads, making this option more expensive.
[manual:mm_explanatory_82 · Mm Explanatory › Syntactic Dependencies (Rules 9-11)] Control dependencies behave differently from address and data dependencies in the sense that a control dependency always extends to all instructions following the original target in program order. Consider the instruction at next will always execute, but the memory operation generated by that last instruction nevertheless still has a control dependency from the memory operation generated by the first instruction.
[manual:mm_explanatory_83 · Mm Explanatory › Syntactic Dependencies (Rules 9-11)] Likewise, consider. Even though both branch outcomes have the same target, there is still a control dependency from the memory operation generated by the first instruction in this snippet to the memory operation generated by the last instruction. This definition of control dependency is subtly stronger than what might be seen in other contexts (e.g., C++), but it conforms with standard definitions of control dependencies in the literature.
[manual:mm_explanatory_84 · Mm Explanatory › Syntactic Dependencies (Rules 9-11)] Notably, PPO rules 9-11 are also intentionally designed to respect dependencies that originate from the output of a successful store-conditional instruction. Typically, an SC instruction will be followed by a conditional branch checking whether the outcome was successful; this implies that there will be a control dependency from the store operation generated by the SC instruction to any memory operations following the branch. PPO rule 11 in turn implies that any subsequent store operations will appear later in the global memory order than the store operation generated by the SC. However, since control, address, and data dependencies are defined over memory operations, and since an unsuccessful SC does not generate a memory operation, no order is enforced between unsuccessful SC and its dependent instructions. Moreover, since SC is defined to carry dependencies from its source registers to rd only when the SC is successful, an unsuccessful SC has no effect on the global memory order.
[manual:mm_explanatory_85 · Mm Explanatory › Syntactic Dependencies (Rules 9-11)] .A variant of the LB litmus test (outcome forbidden) [float="center",align="center",cols=".^1a,.^1a",frame="none",grid="none",options="noheader"]
[manual:mm_explanatory_86 · Mm Explanatory › Syntactic Dependencies (Rules 9-11)] In addition, the choice to respect dependencies originating at store-conditional instructions ensures that certain out-of-thin-air-like behaviors will be prevented. Consider. Suppose a hypothetical implementation could occasionally make some early guarantee that a store-conditional operation will succeed. In this case, (c) could return 0 to a2 early (before actually executing), allowing the sequence (d), (e), (f), (a), and then (b) to execute, and then (c) might execute (successfully) only at that point. This would imply that (c) writes its own success value to 0(s1)! Fortunately, this situation and others like it are prevented by the fact that RVWMO respects dependencies originating at the stores generated by successful SC instructions.
[manual:mm_explanatory_87 · Mm Explanatory › Syntactic Dependencies (Rules 9-11)] We also note that syntactic dependencies between instructions only have any force when they take the form of a syntactic address, control, and/or data dependency. For example: a syntactic dependency between two F instructions via one of the accumulating CSRs in does not imply that the two F instructions must be executed in order. Such a dependency would only serve to ultimately set up later a dependency from both F instructions to a later CSR instruction accessing the CSR flag in question.
[manual:mm_explanatory_88 · Mm Explanatory › Pipeline Dependencies (Rules 12-13)] Rule 12: b is a load, and there exists some store m between a and b in program order such that m has an address or data dependency on a, and b returns a value written by m
[manual:mm_explanatory_89 · Mm Explanatory › Pipeline Dependencies (Rules 12-13)] Rule 13: b is a store, and there exists some instruction m between a and b in program order such that m has an address dependency on a
[manual:mm_explanatory_90 · Mm Explanatory › Pipeline Dependencies (Rules 12-13)] .Because of PPO rule 12 and the data dependency from (d) to (e), (d) must also precede (f) in the global memory order (outcome forbidden) [float="center",align="center",cols=".^1a,.^1a",frame="none",grid="none",options="noheader"]
[manual:mm_explanatory_91 · Mm Explanatory › Pipeline Dependencies (Rules 12-13)] PPO rules 12 and 13 reflect behaviors of almost all real processor pipeline implementations. Rule 12 states that a load cannot forward from a store until the address and data for that store are known. Consider (f) cannot be executed until the data for (e) has been resolved, because (f) must return the value written by (e) (or by something even later in the global memory order), and the old value must not be clobbered by the write-back of (e) before (d) has had a chance to perform. Therefore, (f) will never perform before (d) has performed.
[manual:mm_explanatory_92 · Mm Explanatory › Pipeline Dependencies (Rules 12-13)] .Because of the extra store between (e) and (g), (d) no longer necessarily precedes (g) (outcome permitted)
[manual:mm_explanatory_93 · Mm Explanatory › Pipeline Dependencies (Rules 12-13)] If there were another store to the same address in between (e) and (f), as in, then (f) would no longer be dependent on the data of (e) being resolved, and hence the dependency of (f) on (d), which produces the data for (e), would be broken.
[manual:mm_explanatory_94 · Mm Explanatory › Pipeline Dependencies (Rules 12-13)] Rule 13 makes a similar observation to the previous rule: a store cannot be performed at memory until all previous loads that might access the same address have themselves been performed. Such a load must appear to execute before the store, but it cannot do so if the store were to overwrite the value in memory before the load had a chance to read the old value. Likewise, a store generally cannot be performed until it is known that preceding instructions will not cause an exception due to failed address resolution, and in this sense, rule 13 can be seen as somewhat of a special case of rule 11.
[manual:mm_explanatory_95 · Mm Explanatory › Pipeline Dependencies (Rules 12-13)] .Because of the address dependency from (d) to (e), (d) also precedes (f) (outcome forbidden) [float="center",align="center",cols=".^1a,.^1a",frame="none",grid="none",options="noheader"]
[manual:mm_explanatory_96 · Mm Explanatory › Pipeline Dependencies (Rules 12-13)] Consider (f) cannot be executed until the address for (e) is resolved, because it may turn out that the addresses match; i.e., that a1=s0. Therefore, (f) cannot be sent to memory before (d) has executed and confirmed whether the addresses do indeed overlap.
[manual:mm_explanatory_97 · Mm Explanatory › Beyond Main Memory] RVWMO does not currently attempt to formally describe how FENCE.I, SFENCE.VMA, I/O fences, and PMAs behave. All of these behaviors will be described by future formalizations. In the meantime, the behavior of FENCE.I is described in extlink:zifencei[], the behavior of SFENCE.VMA is described in, and the behavior of I/O fences and the effects of PMAs are described below.
[manual:mm_explanatory_98 · Mm Explanatory › Coherence and Cacheability] The RISC-V Privileged ISA defines Physical Memory Attributes (PMAs) which specify, among other things, whether portions of the address space are coherent and/or cacheable. See the RISC-V Privileged ISA Specification for the complete details. Here, we simply discuss how the various details in each PMA relate to the memory model:
[manual:mm_explanatory_99 · Mm Explanatory › Coherence and Cacheability] Main memory vs.I/O, and I/O memory ordering PMAs: the memory model as defined applies to main memory regions. I/O ordering is discussed below. Supported access types and atomicity PMAs: the memory model is simply applied on top of whatever primitives each region supports. Cacheability PMAs: the cacheability PMAs in general do not affect the memory model. Non-cacheable regions may have more restrictive behavior than cacheable regions, but the set of allowed behaviors does not change regardless. However, some platform-specific and/or device-specific cacheability settings may differ. Coherence PMAs: The memory consistency model for memory regions marked as non-coherent in PMAs is currently platform-specific and/or device-specific: the load-value axiom, the atomicity axiom, and the progress axiom all may be violated with non-coherent memory. Note however that coherent memory does not require a hardware cache coherence protocol. The RISC-V Privileged ISA Specification suggests that hardware-incoherent regions of main memory are discouraged, but the memory model is compatible with hardware coherence, software coherence, implicit coherence due to read-only memory, implicit coherence due to only one agent having access, or otherwise. Idempotency PMAs: Idempotency PMAs are used to specify memory regions for which loads and/or stores may have side effects, and this in turn is used by the microarchitecture to determine, e.g., whether prefetches are legal. This distinction does not affect the memory model.
[manual:mm_explanatory_100 · Mm Explanatory › I/O Ordering] For I/O, the load value axiom and atomicity axiom in general do not apply, as both reads and writes might have device-specific side effects and may return values other than the value "written" by the most recent store to the same address. Nevertheless, the following preserved program order rules still generally apply for accesses to I/O memory: memory access a precedes memory access b in global memory order if a precedes b in program order and one or more of the following holds:
[manual:mm_explanatory_101 · Mm Explanatory › I/O Ordering] a precedes b in preserved program order as defined in, with the exception that acquire and release ordering annotations apply only from one memory operation to another memory operation and from one I/O operation to another I/O operation, but not from a memory operation to an I/O nor vice versa a and b are accesses to overlapping addresses in an I/O region a and b are accesses to the same strongly ordered I/O region a and b are accesses to I/O regions, and the channel associated with the I/O region accessed by either a or b is channel 1 a and b are accesses to I/O regions associated with the same channel (except for channel 0)
[manual:mm_explanatory_102 · Mm Explanatory › I/O Ordering] Note that the FENCE instruction distinguishes between main memory operations and I/O operations in its predecessor and successor sets. To enforce ordering between I/O operations and main memory operations, code must use a FENCE with PI, PO, SI, and/or SO, plus PR, PW, SR, and/or SW. For example, to enforce ordering between a write to main memory and an I/O write to a device register, a FENCE W,O or stronger is needed..Ordering memory and I/O accesses [.text-center,source%linenums,asm]
[manual:mm_explanatory_103 · Mm Explanatory › I/O Ordering] When a fence is in fact used, implementations must assume that the device may attempt to access memory immediately after receiving the MMIO signal, and subsequent memory accesses from that device to memory must observe the effects of all accesses ordered prior to that MMIO operation. In other words, in, suppose 0(a0) is in main memory and 0(a1) is the address of a device register in I/O memory. If the device accesses 0(a0) upon receiving the MMIO write, then that load must conceptually appear after the first store to 0(a0) according to the rules of the RVWMO memory model. In some implementations, the only way to ensure this will be to require that the first store does in fact complete before the MMIO write is issued. Other implementations may find ways to be more aggressive, while others still may not need to do anything different at all for I/O and main memory accesses. Nevertheless, the RVWMO memory model does not distinguish between these options; it simply provides an implementation-agnostic mechanism to specify the orderings that must be enforced.
[manual:mm_explanatory_104 · Mm Explanatory › I/O Ordering] Many architectures include separate notions of "ordering" and "completion" fences, especially as it relates to I/O (as opposed to regular main memory). Ordering fences simply ensure that memory operations stay in order, while completion fences ensure that predecessor accesses have all completed before any successors are made visible. RISC-V does not explicitly distinguish between ordering and completion fences. Instead, this distinction is simply inferred from different uses of the FENCE bits.
[manual:mm_explanatory_105 · Mm Explanatory › I/O Ordering] For implementations that conform to the RISC-V Unix Platform Specification, I/O devices and DMA operations are required to access memory coherently and via strongly ordered I/O channels. Therefore, accesses to regular main memory regions that are concurrently accessed by external devices can also use the standard synchronization mechanisms. Implementations that do not conform to the Unix Platform Specification and/or in which devices do not access memory coherently will need to use mechanisms (which are currently platform-specific or device-specific) to enforce coherency.
[manual:mm_explanatory_106 · Mm Explanatory › I/O Ordering] I/O regions in the address space should be considered non-cacheable regions in the PMAs for those regions. Such regions can be considered coherent by the PMA if they are not cached by any agent.
[manual:mm_explanatory_107 · Mm Explanatory › I/O Ordering] The ordering guarantees in this section may not apply beyond a platform-specific boundary between the RISC-V cores and the device. In particular, I/O accesses sent across an external bus (e.g., PCIe) may be reordered before they reach their ultimate destination. Ordering must be enforced in such situations according to the platform-specific rules of those external devices and buses.
[manual:mm_explanatory_108 · Mm Explanatory › Code Porting and Mapping Guidelines] provides a mapping from TSO memory operations onto RISC-V memory instructions. Normal x86 loads and stores are all inherently acquire-RCpc and release-RCpc operations: TSO enforces all load-load, load-store, and store-store ordering by default. Therefore, under RVWMO, all TSO loads must be mapped onto a load followed by FENCE R,RW, and all TSO stores must be mapped onto FENCE RW,W followed by a store. TSO atomic read-modify-writes and x86 instructions using the LOCK prefix are fully ordered and can be implemented either via an AMO with both aq and rl set, or via an LR with aq set, the arithmetic operation in question, an SC with both aq and rl set, and a conditional branch checking the success condition. In the latter case, the rl annotation on the LR turns out (for non-obvious reasons) to be redundant and can be omitted.
[manual:mm_explanatory_109 · Mm Explanatory › Code Porting and Mapping Guidelines] Alternatives to are also possible. A TSO store can be mapped onto AMOSWAP with rl set. However, since RVWMO PPO Rule 3 forbids forwarding of values from AMOs to subsequent loads, the use of AMOSWAP for stores may negatively affect performance. A TSO load can be mapped using LR with aq set: all such LR instructions will be unpaired, but that fact in and of itself does not preclude the use of LR for loads. However, again, this mapping may also negatively affect performance if it puts more pressure on the reservation mechanism than was originally intended.
[manual:mm_explanatory_110 · Mm Explanatory › Code Porting and Mapping Guidelines] provides a mapping from Power memory operations onto RISC-V memory instructions. Power ISYNC maps on RISC-V to a FENCE.I followed by a FENCE R,R; the latter fence is needed because ISYNC is used to define a "control+control fence" dependency that is not present in RVWMO.
[manual:mm_explanatory_111 · Mm Explanatory › Code Porting and Mapping Guidelines] provides a mapping from ARM memory operations onto RISC-V memory instructions. Since RISC-V does not currently have plain load and store opcodes with aq or rl annotations, ARM load-acquire and store-release operations should be mapped using fences instead. Furthermore, in order to enforce store-release-to-load-acquire ordering, there must be a FENCE RW,RW between the store-release and load-acquire; enforces this by always placing the fence in front of each acquire operation. ARM load-exclusive and store-exclusive instructions can likewise map onto their RISC-V LR and SC equivalents, but instead of placing a FENCE RW,RW in front of an LR with aq set, we simply also set rl instead. ARM ISB maps on RISC-V to FENCE.I followed by FENCE R,R similarly to how ISYNC maps for Power.
[manual:mm_explanatory_112 · Mm Explanatory › Code Porting and Mapping Guidelines] .Mappings from Linux memory primitives to RISC-V primitives.
[manual:mm_explanatory_113 · Mm Explanatory › Code Porting and Mapping Guidelines] With regards to, other constructs (such as spinlocks) should follow accordingly. Platforms or devices with non-coherent DMA may need additional synchronization (such as cache flush or invalidate mechanisms); currently any such extra synchronization will be device-specific.
[manual:mm_explanatory_114 · Mm Explanatory › Code Porting and Mapping Guidelines] provides a mapping of Linux memory ordering macros onto RISC-V memory instructions. The Linux fences dma_rmb() and dma_wmb() map onto FENCE R,R and FENCE W,W, respectively, since the RISC-V Unix Platform requires coherent DMA, but would be mapped onto FENCE RI,RI and FENCE WO,WO, respectively, on a platform with non-coherent DMA. Platforms with non-coherent DMA may also require a mechanism by which cache lines can be flushed and/or invalidated. Such mechanisms will be device-specific and/or standardized in a future extension to the ISA.
[manual:mm_explanatory_115 · Mm Explanatory › Code Porting and Mapping Guidelines] The Linux mappings for release operations may seem stronger than necessary, but these mappings are needed to cover some cases in which Linux requires stronger orderings than the more intuitive mappings would provide. In particular, as of the time this text is being written, Linux is actively debating whether to require load-load, load-store, and store-store orderings between accesses in one critical section and accesses in a subsequent critical section in the same hart and protected by the same synchronization object. Not all combinations of FENCE RW,W/FENCE R,RW mappings with aq/rl mappings combine to provide such orderings. There are a few ways around this problem, including:
[manual:mm_explanatory_116 · Mm Explanatory › Code Porting and Mapping Guidelines] Always use FENCE RW,W/FENCE R,RW, and never use aq/rl. This suffices but is undesirable, as it defeats the purpose of the aq/rl modifiers. Always use aq/rl, and never use FENCE RW,W/FENCE R,RW. This does not currently work due to the lack of load and store opcodes with aq and rl modifiers. Strengthen the mappings of release operations such that they would enforce sufficient orderings in the presence of either type of acquire mapping. This is the currently recommended solution, and the one shown in.
[manual:mm_explanatory_117 · Mm Explanatory › Code Porting and Mapping Guidelines] RVWMO Mapping: (a) lw a0, 0(s0) (b) fence.tso // vs. fence rw,w (c) sd x0,0(s1)... loop: (d) amoswap.d.aq a1,t1,0(s1) bnez a1,loop (e) lw a2,0(s2)
[manual:mm_explanatory_118 · Mm Explanatory › Code Porting and Mapping Guidelines] For example, the critical section ordering rule currently being debated by the Linux community would require (a) to be ordered before (e) in. If that will indeed be required, then it would be insufficient for (b) to map as FENCE RW,W. That said, these mappings are subject to change as the Linux Kernel Memory Model evolves.
[manual:mm_explanatory_119 · Mm Explanatory › Code Porting and Mapping Guidelines] 2+!^*^ must be lr.{w|d}.aqrl in order to interoperate with code mapped per
[manual:machine_0 · Machine-Level ISA, Version 1.13] This chapter describes the machine-level operations available in machine-mode (M-mode), which is the highest privilege mode in a RISC-V hart. M-mode is used for low-level access to a hardware platform and is the first mode entered at reset. M-mode can also be used to implement features that are too difficult or expensive to implement in hardware directly. The RISC-V machine-level ISA contains a common core that is extended depending on which other privilege levels are supported and other details of the hardware implementation.
[manual:machine_1 · Machine › Machine-Level CSRs] In addition to the machine-level CSRs described in this section, M-mode code can access all CSRs at lower privilege levels.
[manual:machine_2 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] The misa CSR is a WARL read-write register reporting the ISA supported by the hart. This register must be readable in any implementation, but a value of zero can be returned to indicate this feature has not been implemented, requiring that CPU capabilities be determined through a separate non-standard mechanism.
[manual:machine_3 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] The mxl (Machine XLEN) field encodes the native base integer ISA width as shown in. The mxl field is read-only. If misa is nonzero, the mxl field indicates the effective XLEN in M-mode, a constant termed MXLEN. XLEN is never greater than MXLEN, but XLEN might be smaller than MXLEN in less-privileged modes.
[manual:machine_4 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] The base width can be quickly ascertained using branches on the sign of the returned misa value, and possibly a shift left by one and a second branch on the sign. These checks can be written in assembly code without knowing the register width (MXLEN) of the hart. The base width is given by _MXLEN=2^MXL+4^_.
[manual:machine_5 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] The base width can also be found if misa is zero, by placing the immediate 2 in a register, then shifting the register left by 31 bits. If zero, the hart is RV32, else it is RV64.
[manual:machine_6 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] The Extensions field encodes the presence of the standard extensions, with a single bit per letter of the alphabet (bit 0 encodes presence of extension A, bit 1 encodes presence of extension B, through to bit 25 which encodes Z). The i bit will be set for the RV32I and RV64I base ISAs, and the e bit will be set for RV32E and RV64E. The Extensions field is a WARL field that can contain writable bits where the implementation allows the supported ISA to be modified. At reset, the Extensions field shall contain the maximal set of supported extensions, and i shall be selected over e if both are available.
[manual:machine_7 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] When a standard extension is disabled by clearing its bit in misa, the instructions and CSRs defined or modified by the extension revert to their defined or reserved behaviors as if the extension is not implemented.
[manual:machine_8 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] For a given RISC-V execution environment, an instruction, extension, or other feature of the RISC-V ISA is ordinarily judged to be implemented or not by the observable execution behavior in that environment. For example, the F extension is said to be implemented for an execution environment if and only if the instructions that the RISC-V Unprivileged ISA defines for F execute as specified.
[manual:machine_9 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] With this definition of implemented, disabling an extension by clearing its bit in misa results in the extension being considered not implemented in M-mode. For example, setting misa.f=0 results in the F extension being not implemented for M-mode, because the F extension's instructions will not act as the Unprivileged ISA requires but may instead raise an illegal-instruction exception.
[manual:machine_10 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] Defining the term implemented based strictly on the observable behavior might conflict with other common understandings of the same word. In particular, although common usage may allow for the combination "implemented but disabled," in this document it is considered a contradiction of terms, because disabled implies execution will not behave as required for the feature to be considered implemented. In the same vein, "implemented and enabled" is redundant here; "implemented" suffices.
[manual:machine_11 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] All bits that are reserved for future use must return zero when read.
[manual:machine_12 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] The x bit will be set if there are any non-standard extensions.
[manual:machine_13 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] When the b bit is 1, the implementation supports the instructions provided by the ZBA, ZBB, and ZBS extensions. When the b bit is 0, it indicates that the implementation might not support one or more of the ZBA, ZBB, or ZBS extensions.
[manual:machine_14 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] When the m bit is 1, the implementation supports all multiply and division instructions defined by the M extension. When the m bit is 0, it indicates that the implementation might not support those instructions. However if the ZMMUL extension is supported then the multiply instructions it specifies are supported irrespective of the value of the m bit.
[manual:machine_15 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] When the s bit is 1, the implementation supports supervisor mode. When the s bit is 0, the implementation might not support supervisor mode.
[manual:machine_16 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] When the u bit is 1, the implementation supports user mode. When the u bit is 0, the implementation might not support user mode.
[manual:machine_17 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] The misa CSR exposes a rudimentary catalog of CPU features to machine-mode code. More extensive information can be obtained in machine mode by probing other machine registers, and examining other ROM storage in the system as part of the boot process.
[manual:machine_18 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] We require that lower privilege levels execute environment calls instead of reading CPU registers to determine features available at each privilege level. This enables virtualization layers to alter the ISA observed at any level, and supports a much richer command interface without burdening hardware designs.
[manual:machine_19 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] The e bit is read-only. Unless misa is all read-only zero, the e bit always reads as the complement of the i bit. If an execution environment supports both RV32E and RV32I, software can select RV32E by clearing the i bit.
[manual:machine_20 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] If an ISA feature x depends on an ISA feature y, then attempting to enable feature x but disable feature y results in both features being disabled. For example, setting f=0 and d=1 results in both f and d being cleared. Similarly, setting u=0 and s=1 results in both u and s being cleared.
[manual:machine_21 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] An implementation may impose additional constraints on the collective setting of two or more misa fields, in which case they function collectively as a single WARL field. An attempt to write an unsupported combination causes those bits to be set to some supported combination.
[manual:machine_22 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] Writing misa may increase IALIGN, e.g., by disabling the C extension. If an instruction that would write misa increases IALIGN, and the subsequent instruction's address is not IALIGN-bit aligned, the write to misa is suppressed, leaving misa unchanged.
[manual:machine_23 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] misa.c must be clear if any of the following holds:
[manual:machine_24 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] ZCA is not implemented MXLEN=32, F is implemented, and ZCF is not implemented D is implemented, and ZCD is not implemented
[manual:machine_25 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] When software enables an extension that was previously disabled, then all state uniquely associated with that extension is UNSPECIFIED, unless otherwise specified by that extension.
[manual:machine_26 · Machine › Machine ISA (misa) Register] NOTE: Although one of the bits 25{endash}0 in misa being set to 1 implies that the corresponding feature is implemented, the inverse is not necessarily true: one of these bits being clear does not necessarily imply that the corresponding feature is not implemented. This follows from the fact that, when a feature is not implemented, the corresponding opcodes and CSRs become reserved, not necessarily illegal.
[manual:machine_27 · Machine › Machine Vendor ID (mvendorid) Register] The mvendorid CSR is a 32-bit read-only register providing the JEDEC manufacturer ID of the provider of the core. This register must be readable in any implementation, but a value of 0 can be returned to indicate the field is not implemented or that this is a non-commercial implementation.
[manual:machine_28 · Machine › Machine Vendor ID (mvendorid) Register] JEDEC manufacturer IDs are ordinarily encoded as a sequence of one-byte continuation codes 0x7f, terminated by a one-byte ID not equal to 0x7f, with an odd parity bit in the most-significant bit of each byte. mvendorid encodes the number of one-byte continuation codes in the Bank field, and encodes the final byte in the Offset field, discarding the parity bit. For example, the JEDEC manufacturer ID 0x7f 0x7f 0x7f 0x7f 0x7f 0x7f 0x7f 0x7f 0x7f 0x7f 0x7f 0x7f 0x8a (twelve continuation codes followed by 0x8a) would be encoded in the mvendorid CSR as 0x60a.
[manual:machine_29 · Machine › Machine Vendor ID (mvendorid) Register] In JEDEC's parlance, the bank number is one greater than the number of continuation codes; hence, the mvendorid Bank field encodes a value that is one less than the JEDEC bank number.
[manual:machine_30 · Machine › Machine Vendor ID (mvendorid) Register] *** Previously the vendor ID was to be a number allocated by RISC-V International, but this duplicates the work of JEDEC in maintaining a manufacturer ID standard. At time of writing, registering a manufacturer ID with JEDEC has a one-time cost of $500.
[manual:machine_31 · Machine › Machine Architecture ID (marchid) Register] The marchid CSR is an MXLEN-bit read-only register encoding the base microarchitecture of the hart. This register must be readable in any implementation, but a value of 0 can be returned to indicate the field is not implemented. The combination of mvendorid and marchid should uniquely identify the type of hart microarchitecture that is implemented.
[manual:machine_32 · Machine › Machine Architecture ID (marchid) Register] Open-source project architecture IDs are allocated globally by RISC-V International, and have non-zero architecture IDs with a zero most-significant-bit (MSB). Commercial architecture IDs are allocated by each commercial vendor independently, but must have the MSB set and cannot contain zero in the remaining MXLEN-1 bits.
[manual:machine_33 · Machine › Machine Architecture ID (marchid) Register] The intent is for the architecture ID to represent the microarchitecture associated with the project around which development occurs rather than a particular organization. Commercial fabrications of open-source designs should (and might be required by the license to) retain the original architecture ID. This will aid in reducing fragmentation and tool support costs, as well as provide attribution. Open-source architecture IDs are administered by RISC-V International and should only be allocated to released, functioning open-source projects. Commercial architecture IDs can be managed independently by any registered vendor but are required to have IDs disjoint from the open-source architecture IDs (MSB set) to prevent collisions if a vendor wishes to use both closed-source and open-source microarchitectures.
[manual:machine_34 · Machine › Machine Architecture ID (marchid) Register] The convention adopted within the following Implementation field can be used to segregate branches of the same architecture design, including by organization. The misa register also helps distinguish different variants of a design.
[manual:machine_35 · Machine › Machine Implementation ID (mimpid) Register] The mimpid CSR provides a unique encoding of the version of the processor implementation. This register must be readable in any implementation, but a value of 0 can be returned to indicate that the field is not implemented. The Implementation value should reflect the design of the RISC-V processor itself and not any surrounding system.
[manual:machine_36 · Machine › Machine Implementation ID (mimpid) Register] The format of this field is left to the provider of the architecture source code, but will often be printed by standard tools as a hexadecimal string without any leading or trailing zeros, so the Implementation value can be left-justified (i.e., filled in from most-significant nibble down) with subfields aligned on nibble boundaries to ease human readability.
[manual:machine_37 · Machine › Hart ID (mhartid) Register] The mhartid CSR is an MXLEN-bit read-only register containing the integer ID of the hardware thread running the code. This register must be readable in any implementation. Hart IDs might not necessarily be numbered contiguously in a multiprocessor system, but one hart must have a hart ID of zero. Hart IDs must be unique within the execution environment.
[manual:machine_38 · Machine › Hart ID (mhartid) Register] In certain cases, we must ensure exactly one hart runs some code (e.g., at reset), and so require one hart to have a known hart ID of zero.
[manual:machine_39 · Machine › Hart ID (mhartid) Register] For efficiency, system implementers should aim to reduce the magnitude of the largest hart ID used in a system.
[manual:machine_40 · Machine › Machine Status (mstatus and mstatush) Registers] The mstatus register is an MXLEN-bit read/write register formatted as shown in for RV32 and for RV64. mstatus must be implemented. The mstatus register keeps track of and controls the hart’s current operating state. A restricted view of mstatus appears as the sstatus register in the S-level ISA.
[manual:machine_41 · Machine › Machine Status (mstatus and mstatush) Registers] For RV32 only, mstatush is a 32-bit read/write register formatted as shown in. Bits 30:4 of mstatush generally contain the same fields found in bits 62:36 of mstatus for RV64. Fields sd, sxl, and uxl do not exist in mstatush.
[manual:machine_42 · Machine › Privilege and Global Interrupt-Enable Stack in mstatus register] Global interrupt-enable bits, mie and sie, are provided for M-mode and S-mode respectively. These bits are primarily used to guarantee atomicity with respect to interrupt handlers in the current privilege mode.
[manual:machine_43 · Machine › Privilege and Global Interrupt-Enable Stack in mstatus register] The global _x_IE bits are located in the low-order bits of mstatus, allowing them to be atomically set or cleared with a single CSR instruction.
[manual:machine_44 · Machine › Privilege and Global Interrupt-Enable Stack in mstatus register] When a hart is executing in privilege mode x, interrupts are globally enabled when _xIE=1 and globally disabled when xIE=0. Interrupts for lower-privilege modes, w<x, are always globally disabled regardless of the setting of any global wIE bit for the lower-privilege mode. Interrupts for higher-privilege modes, y>x, are always globally enabled regardless of the setting of the global y_IE bit for the higher-privilege mode. Higher-privilege-level code can use separate per-interrupt enable bits to disable selected higher-privilege-mode interrupts before ceding control to a lower-privilege mode. mie and mpie must be writable. If supervisor mode is not implemented, then sie and spie are read-only 0; otherwise, they must be writable.
[manual:machine_45 · Machine › Privilege and Global Interrupt-Enable Stack in mstatus register] A higher-privilege mode y could disable all of its interrupts before ceding control to a lower-privilege mode but this would be unusual as it would leave only a synchronous trap, non-maskable interrupt, or reset as means to regain control of the hart.
[manual:machine_46 · Machine › Privilege and Global Interrupt-Enable Stack in mstatus register] To support nested traps, each privilege mode x that can respond to interrupts has a two-level stack of interrupt-enable bits and privilege modes. _xPIE holds the value of the interrupt-enable bit active prior to the trap, and xPP holds the previous privilege mode. The x_PP fields can only hold privilege modes up to x, so mpp is two bits wide and spp is one bit wide. When a trap is taken from privilege mode y into privilege mode x, _xPIE is set to the value of xIE; xIE is set to 0; and x_PP is set to y.
[manual:machine_47 · Machine › Privilege and Global Interrupt-Enable Stack in mstatus register] For lower privilege modes, any trap (synchronous or asynchronous) is usually taken at a higher privilege mode with interrupts disabled upon entry. The higher-level trap handler will either service the trap and return using the stacked information, or, if not returning immediately to the interrupted context, will save the privilege stack before re-enabling interrupts, so only one entry per stack is required.
[manual:machine_48 · Machine › Privilege and Global Interrupt-Enable Stack in mstatus register] An MRET or SRET instruction is used to return from a trap in M-mode or S-mode respectively. When executing an _xRET instruction, supposing x_PP holds the value y, _xIE is set to x_PIE; the privilege mode is changed to y; _xPIE is set to 1; and xPP is set to the least-privileged supported mode (U if U-mode is implemented, else M). If y{ne}M, x_RET also sets mprv=0.
[manual:machine_49 · Machine › Privilege and Global Interrupt-Enable Stack in mstatus register] Setting _xPP to the least-privileged supported mode on an x_RET helps identify software bugs in the management of the two-level privilege-mode stack.
[manual:machine_50 · Machine › Privilege and Global Interrupt-Enable Stack in mstatus register] Trap handlers must be designed to neither enable interrupts nor cause exceptions during the phase of handling where the trap handler preserves the critical state information required to handle and resume from the trap. An exception or interrupt in this critical phase of trap handling may lead to a trap that can overwrite such critical state. This could result in the loss of data needed to recover from the initial trap. Further, if an exception occurs in the code path needed to handle traps, then such a situation may lead to an infinite loop of traps. To prevent this, trap handlers must be meticulously designed to identify and safely manage exceptions within their operational flow.
[manual:machine_51 · Machine › Privilege and Global Interrupt-Enable Stack in mstatus register] _x_PP fields are WARL fields that can hold only privilege mode x and any implemented privilege mode lower than x. If privilege mode x is not implemented, then _x_PP must be read-only 0.
[manual:machine_52 · Machine › Privilege and Global Interrupt-Enable Stack in mstatus register] M-mode software can determine whether a privilege mode is implemented by writing that mode to mpp then reading it back.
[manual:machine_53 · Machine › Privilege and Global Interrupt-Enable Stack in mstatus register] If the machine provides only U and M modes, then only a single hardware storage bit is required to represent either 00 or 11 in mpp.
[manual:machine_54 · Machine › Double Trap Control in mstatus Register] A double trap typically arises during a sensitive phase in trap handling operations -- when an exception or interrupt occurs while the trap handler (the component responsible for managing these events) is in a non-reentrant state. This non-reentrancy usually occurs in the early phase of trap handling, wherein the trap handler has not yet preserved the necessary state to handle and resume from the trap. The occurrence of a trap during this phase can lead to an overwrite of critical state information, resulting in the loss of data needed to recover from the initial trap. The trap that caused this critical error condition is henceforth called the unexpected trap. Trap handlers are designed to neither enable interrupts nor cause exceptions during this phase of handling. However, managing Hardware-Error exceptions, which may occur unpredictably, presents significant challenges in trap handler implementation due to the potential risk of a double trap.
[manual:machine_55 · Machine › Double Trap Control in mstatus Register] The M-mode-disable-trap (mdt) bit is a WARL field introduced by the SMDBLTRP extension. Upon reset, the mdt field is set to 1. When the mdt bit is set to 1 by an explicit CSR write, the mie (Machine Interrupt Enable) bit is cleared to 0. For RV64, this clearing occurs regardless of the value written, if any, to the mie bit by the same write. The mie bit can only be set to 1 by an explicit CSR write if the mdt bit is already 0 or, for RV64, is being set to 0 by the same write (For RV32, the mdt bit is in mstatush and the mie bit in mstatus register).
[manual:machine_56 · Machine › Double Trap Control in mstatus Register] When a trap is to be taken into M-mode, if the mdt bit is currently 0, it is then set to 1, and the trap is delivered as expected. However, if mdt is already set to 1, then this is an unexpected trap. When the SMRNMI extension is implemented, a trap caused by an RNMI is not considered an unexpected trap irrespective of the state of the mdt bit. A trap caused by an RNMI does not set the mdt bit. However, a trap that occurs when executing in M-mode with mnstatus.nmie set to 0 is an unexpected trap.
[manual:machine_57 · Machine › Double Trap Control in mstatus Register] In the event of a unexpected trap, the handling is as follows:
[manual:machine_58 · Machine › Double Trap Control in mstatus Register] When the Smrnmi extension is implemented and mnstatus.nmie is 1, the hart traps to the RNMI handler. To deliver this trap, the mnepc and mncause registers are written with the values that the unexpected trap would have written to the mepc and mcause registers respectively. The privilege mode information fields in the mnstatus register are written to indicate M-mode and its nmie field is set to 0.
[manual:machine_59 · Machine › Double Trap Control in mstatus Register] The consequence of this specification is that on occurrence of double trap the RNMI handler is not provided with information that a trap reports in the mtval and the mtval2 registers. This information, if needed, can be obtained by the RNMI handler by decoding the instruction at the address in mnepc and examining its source register contents.
[manual:machine_60 · Machine › Double Trap Control in mstatus Register] When the SMRNMI extension is not implemented, or if the SMRNMI extension is implemented and mnstatus.nmie is 0, the hart enters a critical-error state without updating any architectural state, including the pc. This state involves ceasing execution, disabling all interrupts (including NMIs), and asserting a "critical-error" signal to the platform. Whether performance counters and timers are updated in the critical-error state is UNSPECIFIED.
[manual:machine_61 · Machine › Double Trap Control in mstatus Register] The actions performed by the platform when a hart asserts a "critical-error" signal are platform-specific. The range of possible actions include restarting the affected hart or restarting the entire platform, among others.
[manual:machine_62 · Machine › Double Trap Control in mstatus Register] When the SMDBLTRP extension is implemented, executing an MRET instruction, or executing an SRET instruction while the current privilege mode is M, has the following additional effects. The mdt bit is set to 0. If the Ssdbltrp extension is also implemented, and the new privilege mode is U, VS, or VU, then sstatus.sdt is also set to 0. Additionally, if it is VU, then vsstatus.sdt is also set to 0.
[manual:machine_63 · Machine › Double Trap Control in mstatus Register] When the SMDBLTRP extension is implemented, the MNRET instruction, provided by the SMRNMI extension, sets the mdt bit to 0 if the new privilege mode is not M. If the SSDBLTRP extension is also implemented, and the new privilege mode is U, VS, or VU, then sstatus.sdt is also set to 0. Additionally, if it is VU, then vsstatus.sdt is also set to 0.
[manual:machine_64 · Machine › Base ISA Control in mstatus Register] For RV64 harts, the sxl and uxl fields are WARL fields that control the value of XLEN for S-mode and U-mode, respectively. The encoding of these fields is the same as the mxl field of misa, shown in. The effective XLEN in S-mode and U-mode are termed SXLEN and UXLEN, respectively.
[manual:machine_65 · Machine › Base ISA Control in mstatus Register] When MXLEN=32, the sxl and uxl fields do not exist, and SXLEN=32 and UXLEN=32.
[manual:machine_66 · Machine › Base ISA Control in mstatus Register] When MXLEN=64, if S-mode is not supported, then sxl is read-only zero. Otherwise, it is a WARL field that encodes the current value of SXLEN. In particular, an implementation may make sxl be a read-only field whose value always ensures that SXLEN=MXLEN.
[manual:machine_67 · Machine › Base ISA Control in mstatus Register] When MXLEN=64, if U-mode is not supported, then uxl is read-only zero. Otherwise, it is a WARL field that encodes the current value of UXLEN. In particular, an implementation may make uxl be a read-only field whose value always ensures that UXLEN=MXLEN or UXLEN=SXLEN.
[manual:machine_68 · Machine › Base ISA Control in mstatus Register] If S-mode is implemented, the set of legal values that the uxl field may assume excludes those that would cause UXLEN to be greater than SXLEN.
[manual:machine_69 · Machine › Base ISA Control in mstatus Register] Whenever XLEN in any mode is set to a value less than the widest supported XLEN, all operations must ignore source operand register bits above the configured XLEN, and must sign-extend results to fill the entire widest supported XLEN in the destination register. Similarly, pc bits above XLEN are ignored, and when the pc is written, it is sign-extended to fill the widest supported XLEN.
[manual:machine_70 · Machine › Base ISA Control in mstatus Register] We require that operations always fill the entire underlying hardware registers with defined values to avoid implementation-defined behavior.
[manual:machine_71 · Machine › Base ISA Control in mstatus Register] To reduce hardware complexity, the architecture imposes no checks that lower-privilege modes have XLEN settings less than or equal to the next-higher privilege mode. In practice, such settings would almost always be a software bug, but machine operation is well-defined even in this case.
[manual:machine_72 · Machine › Base ISA Control in mstatus Register] Some HINT instructions are encoded as integer computational instructions that overwrite their destination register with its current value, e.g., C.ADDI. When such a HINT is executed with XLEN < MXLEN and bits MXLEN..XLEN of the destination register not all equal to bit XLEN-1, it is implementation-defined whether bits MXLEN..XLEN of the destination register are unchanged or are overwritten with copies of bit XLEN-1.
[manual:machine_73 · Machine › Base ISA Control in mstatus Register] NOTE: This definition allows implementations to elide register write-back for some HINTs, while allowing them to execute other HINTs in the same manner as other integer computational instructions. The implementation choice is observable only by privilege modes with an XLEN setting greater than the current XLEN; it is invisible to the current privilege mode.
[manual:machine_74 · Machine › Memory Privilege in mstatus Register] The mprv (Modify PRiVilege) bit modifies the effective privilege mode, i.e., the privilege level at which explicit memory accesses execute. When mprv=0, explicit memory accesses behave as normal, using the translation and protection mechanisms of the current privilege mode. When mprv=1, load and store memory addresses are translated and protected, and endianness is applied, as though the current privilege mode were set to mpp. Instruction address-translation and protection are unaffected by the setting of mprv. mprv is read-only 0 if U-mode is not supported; otherwise, it must be writable.
[manual:machine_75 · Machine › Memory Privilege in mstatus Register] An MRET or SRET instruction that changes the privilege mode to a mode less privileged than M also sets mprv=0.
[manual:machine_76 · Machine › Memory Privilege in mstatus Register] The mxr (Make eXecutable Readable) bit modifies the privilege with which loads access virtual memory. When mxr=0, only loads from pages marked readable (R=1 in ) will succeed. When mxr=1, loads from pages marked either readable or executable (R=1 or X=1) will succeed. mxr has no effect when page-based virtual memory is not in effect. mxr is read-only 0 if S-mode is not supported or if satp.mode is read-only 0; otherwise, it must be writable.
[manual:machine_77 · Machine › Memory Privilege in mstatus Register] The mprv and mxr mechanisms were conceived to improve the efficiency of M-mode routines that emulate missing hardware features, e.g., misaligned loads and stores. mprv obviates the need to perform address translation in software. mxr allows instruction words to be loaded from pages marked execute-only.
[manual:machine_78 · Machine › Memory Privilege in mstatus Register] The current privilege mode and the privilege mode specified by mpp might have different XLEN settings. When mprv=1, load and store memory addresses are treated as though the current XLEN were set to MPP’s XLEN, following the rules in.
[manual:machine_79 · Machine › Memory Privilege in mstatus Register] The sum (permit Supervisor User Memory access) bit modifies the privilege with which S-mode loads and stores access virtual memory. When sum=0, S-mode memory accesses to pages that are accessible by U-mode (U=1 in ) will fault. When sum=1, these accesses are permitted. sum has no effect when page-based virtual memory is not in effect. Note that, while sum is ordinarily ignored when not executing in S-mode, it is in effect when mprv=1 and mpp=S. sum is read-only 0 if S-mode is not supported or if satp.mode is read-only 0; otherwise, it must be writable.
[manual:machine_80 · Machine › Memory Privilege in mstatus Register] The mxr and sum mechanisms only affect the interpretation of permissions encoded in page-table entries. In particular, they have no impact on whether access-fault exceptions are raised due to PMAs or PMP.
[manual:machine_81 · Machine › Endianness Control in mstatus and mstatush Registers] The mbe, sbe, and ube bits in mstatus and mstatush are WARL fields that control the endianness of memory accesses other than instruction fetches. Each may be read/write or read-only.
[manual:machine_82 · Machine › Endianness Control in mstatus and mstatush Registers] mbe controls whether non-instruction-fetch memory accesses made from M-mode (assuming mstatus.mprv=0) are little-endian (mbe=0) or big-endian (mbe=1).
[manual:machine_83 · Machine › Endianness Control in mstatus and mstatush Registers] If S-mode is not supported, sbe is read-only 0. Otherwise, sbe controls whether explicit load and store memory accesses made from S-mode are little-endian (sbe=0) or big-endian (sbe=1).
[manual:machine_84 · Machine › Endianness Control in mstatus and mstatush Registers] If U-mode is not supported, ube is read-only 0. Otherwise, UBE controls whether explicit load and store memory accesses made from U-mode are little-endian (ube=0) or big-endian (ube=1).
[manual:machine_85 · Machine › Endianness Control in mstatus and mstatush Registers] For implicit accesses to supervisor-level memory management data structures, such as page tables, endianness is always controlled by sbe. Since changing sbe alters the implementation’s interpretation of these data structures, if any such data structures remain in use across a change to sbe, M-mode software must follow such a change to sbe by executing an SFENCE.VMA instruction with rs1=x0 and rs2=x0.
[manual:machine_86 · Machine › Endianness Control in mstatus and mstatush Registers] Only in contrived scenarios will a given memory-management data structure be interpreted as both little-endian and big-endian. In practice, sbe will only be changed at runtime on world switches, in which case neither the old nor new memory-management data structure will be reinterpreted in a different endianness. In this case, no additional SFENCE.VMA is necessary, beyond what would ordinarily be required for a world switch.
[manual:machine_87 · Machine › Endianness Control in mstatus and mstatush Registers] If S-mode is supported, an implementation may make sbe be a read-only copy of mbe. If U-mode is supported, an implementation may make ube be a read-only copy of either mbe or sbe.
[manual:machine_88 · Machine › Endianness Control in mstatus and mstatush Registers] An implementation supports only little-endian memory accesses if fields mbe, sbe, and ube are all read-only 0. An implementation supports only big-endian memory accesses (aside from instruction fetches) if mbe is read-only 1 and sbe and ube are each read-only 1 when S-mode and U-mode are supported.
[manual:machine_89 · Machine › Endianness Control in mstatus and mstatush Registers] defines a hart's address space as a circular sequence of 2^XLEN^ bytes at consecutive addresses. The correspondence between addresses and byte locations is fixed and not affected by any endianness mode. Rather, the applicable endianness mode determines the order of mapping between memory bytes and a multibyte quantity (halfword, word, etc.).
[manual:machine_90 · Machine › Endianness Control in mstatus and mstatush Registers] Standard RISC-V ABIs are expected to be purely little-endian-only or big-endian-only, with no accommodation for mixing endianness. Nevertheless, endianness control has been defined so as to permit, for instance, an OS of one endianness to execute user-mode programs of the opposite endianness. Consideration has been given also to the possibility of non-standard usages whereby software flips the endianness of memory accesses as needed.
[manual:machine_91 · Machine › Endianness Control in mstatus and mstatush Registers] RISC-V instructions are uniformly little-endian to decouple instruction encoding from the current endianness settings, for the benefit of both hardware and software. Otherwise, for instance, a RISC-V assembler or disassembler would always need to know the intended active endianness, despite that the endianness mode might change dynamically during execution. In contrast, by giving instructions a fixed endianness, it is sometimes possible for carefully written software to be endianness-agnostic even in binary form, much like position-independent code.
[manual:machine_92 · Machine › Endianness Control in mstatus and mstatush Registers] The choice to have instructions be only little-endian does have consequences, however, for RISC-V software that encodes or decodes machine instructions. In big-endian mode, such software must account for the fact that explicit loads and stores have endianness opposite that of instructions, for example by swapping byte order after loads and before stores.
[manual:machine_93 · Machine › Virtualization Support in mstatus Register] The tvm (Trap Virtual Memory) bit is a WARL field that supports intercepting supervisor virtual-memory management operations. When tvm=1, attempts to read or write the satp CSR or execute an SFENCE.VMA or SINVAL.VMA instruction while executing in S-mode will raise an illegal-instruction exception. When tvm=0, these operations are permitted in S-mode. tvm is read-only 0 when S-mode is not supported or if satp.mode is read-only 0; otherwise, it must be writable.
[manual:machine_94 · Machine › Virtualization Support in mstatus Register] The tvm mechanism improves virtualization efficiency by permitting guest operating systems to execute in S-mode, rather than classically virtualizing them in U-mode. This approach obviates the need to trap accesses to most S-mode CSRs.
[manual:machine_95 · Machine › Virtualization Support in mstatus Register] Trapping satp accesses and the SFENCE.VMA and SINVAL.VMA instructions provides the hooks necessary to lazily populate shadow page tables.
[manual:machine_96 · Machine › Virtualization Support in mstatus Register] The tw (Timeout Wait) bit is a WARL field that supports intercepting the WFI instruction (see ). When tw=0, the WFI instruction may execute in modes less privileged than M when not prevented for some other reason. When tw=1, then if WFI is executed in any less-privileged mode, and it does not complete within an implementation-specific, bounded time limit, the WFI instruction causes an illegal-instruction exception. An implementation may have WFI always raise an illegal-instruction exception in modes less privileged than M when tw=1, even if there are pending globally-disabled interrupts when the instruction is executed. tw is read-only 0 when there are no modes less privileged than M; otherwise, it must be writable.
[manual:machine_97 · Machine › Virtualization Support in mstatus Register] Trapping the WFI instruction can trigger a world switch to another guest OS, rather than wastefully idling in the current guest.
[manual:machine_98 · Machine › Virtualization Support in mstatus Register] When S-mode is implemented, then executing WFI in U-mode causes an illegal-instruction exception, regardless of the value of the tw bit, unless the instruction completes within an implementation-specific, bounded time limit.
[manual:machine_99 · Machine › Virtualization Support in mstatus Register] The tsr (Trap SRET) bit is a WARL field that supports intercepting the supervisor exception return instruction, SRET. When tsr=1, attempts to execute SRET while executing in S-mode will raise an illegal-instruction exception. When tsr=0, this operation is permitted in S-mode. tsr is read-only 0 when S-mode is not supported; otherwise, it must be writable.
[manual:machine_100 · Machine › Virtualization Support in mstatus Register] Trapping SRET is necessary to emulate the hypervisor extension (see ) on implementations that do not provide it.
[manual:machine_101 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] Supporting substantial extensions is one of the primary goals of RISC-V, and hence we define a standard interface to allow unchanged privileged-mode code, particularly a supervisor-level OS, to support arbitrary user-mode state extensions.
[manual:machine_102 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] To date, the V extension is the only standard extension that defines additional state beyond the floating-point CSR and data registers.
[manual:machine_103 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] The fs[1:0] and vs[1:0] WARL fields and the xs[1:0] read-only field are used to reduce the cost of context save and restore by setting and tracking the current state of the floating-point unit and any other user-mode extensions respectively. The fs field encodes the status of the floating-point unit state, including the floating-point registers f0{endash}`f31 and the CSRs fcsr, frm, and fflags. The vs field encodes the status of the vector extension state, including the vector registers v0{endash}v31` and the CSRs vcsr, vxrm, vxsat, vstart, vl, vtype, and vlenb. The xs field encodes the status of additional user-mode extensions and associated state. These fields can be checked by a context switch routine to quickly determine whether a state save or restore is required. If a save or restore is required, additional instructions and CSRs are typically required to effect and optimize the process.
[manual:machine_104 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] The design anticipates that most context switches will not need to save/restore state in either or both of the floating-point unit or other extensions, so provides a fast check via the SD bit.
[manual:machine_105 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] The fs, vs, and xs fields use the same status encoding as shown in, with the four possible status values being Off, Initial, Clean, and Dirty.
[manual:machine_106 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] .Encoding of FS[1:0], VS[1:0], and XS[1:0] status fields
[manual:machine_107 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] If the F extension is implemented, the fs field shall not be read-only zero.
[manual:machine_108 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] If neither the F extension nor S-mode is implemented, then fs is read-only zero. If S-mode is implemented but the F extension is not, fs may optionally be read-only zero.
[manual:machine_109 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] Implementations with S-mode but without the F extension are permitted, but not required, to make the fs field be read-only zero. Some such implementations will choose not to have the fs field be read-only zero, so as to enable emulation of the F extension for both S-mode and U-mode via invisible traps into M-mode.
[manual:machine_110 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] If the v registers are implemented, the vs field shall not be read-only zero.
[manual:machine_111 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] If neither the v registers nor S-mode is implemented, then vs is read-only zero. If S-mode is implemented but the v registers are not, vs may optionally be read-only zero.
[manual:machine_112 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] In harts without additional user extensions requiring new state, the xs field is read-only zero. Every additional extension with state provides a CSR field that encodes the equivalent of the xs states. The xs field represents a summary of all extensions' status as shown in.
[manual:machine_113 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] The xs field effectively reports the maximum status value across all user-extension status fields, though individual extensions can use a different encoding than xs.
[manual:machine_114 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] The sd bit is a read-only bit that summarizes whether either the fs, vs, or xs fields signal the presence of some dirty state that will require saving extended user context to memory. If fs, vs, and xs are all read-only zero, then sd is also always zero.
[manual:machine_115 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] When an extension's status is set to Off, any instruction that attempts to read or write the corresponding state will cause an illegal-instruction exception. When the status is Initial, the corresponding state should have an initial constant value. When the status is Clean, the corresponding state is potentially different from the initial value, but matches the last value stored on a context swap. When the status is Dirty, the corresponding state has potentially been modified since the last context save.
[manual:machine_116 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] During a context save, the responsible privileged code need only write out the corresponding state if its status is Dirty, and can then reset the extension's status to Clean. During a context restore, the context need only be loaded from memory if the status is Clean (it should never be Dirty at restore). If the status is Initial, the context must be set to an initial constant value on context restore to avoid a security hole, but this can be done without accessing memory. For example, the floating-point registers can all be initialized to the immediate value 0.
[manual:machine_117 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] The fs, vs, and xs fields are read by the privileged code before saving the context. The fs and vs fields are set directly by privileged code when resuming a user context, while the xs field is set indirectly by writing to the status register of the individual extensions. The status fields are also updated during execution of instructions, regardless of privilege mode.
[manual:machine_118 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] Extensions to the user-mode ISA often include additional user-mode state, and this state can be considerably larger than the base integer registers. The extensions might only be used for some applications, or might only be needed for short phases within a single application. To improve performance, the user-mode extension can define additional instructions to allow user-mode software to return the unit to an initial state or even to turn off the unit.
[manual:machine_119 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] For example, a coprocessor might require to be configured before use and can be "unconfigured" after use. The unconfigured state would be represented as the Initial state for context save. If the same application remains running between the unconfigure and the next configure (which would set status to Dirty), there is no need to actually reinitialize the state at the unconfigure instruction, as all state is local to the user process, i.e., the Initial state may only cause the coprocessor state to be initialized to a constant value at context restore, not at every unconfigure.
[manual:machine_120 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] Executing a user-mode instruction to disable a unit and place it into the Off state will cause an illegal-instruction exception to be raised if any subsequent instruction tries to use the unit before it is turned back on. A user-mode instruction to turn a unit on must also ensure the unit's state is properly initialized, as the unit might have been used by another context meantime.
[manual:machine_121 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] Changing the setting of fs has no effect on the contents of the floating-point register state. In particular, setting fs=Off does not destroy the state, nor does setting fs=Initial clear the contents. Similarly, the setting of VS has no effect on the contents of the vector register state. Other extensions, however, might not preserve state when set to Off.
[manual:machine_122 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] Implementations may choose to track the dirtiness of the floating-point register state imprecisely by reporting the state to be dirty even when it has not been modified. On some implementations, some instructions that do not mutate the floating-point state may cause the state to transition from Initial or Clean to Dirty. On other implementations, dirtiness might not be tracked at all, in which case the valid FS states are Off and Dirty, and an attempt to set fs to Initial or Clean causes it to be set to Dirty.
[manual:machine_123 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] This definition of fs does not disallow setting fs to Dirty as a result of errant speculation. Some platforms may choose to disallow speculatively writing fs to close a potential side channel.
[manual:machine_124 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] If an instruction explicitly or implicitly writes a floating-point register or the fcsr but does not alter its contents, and fs=Initial or fs=Clean, it is implementation-defined whether FS transitions to Dirty.
[manual:machine_125 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] Implementations may choose to track the dirtiness of the vector register state in an analogous imprecise fashion, including possibly setting vs to Dirty when software attempts to set vs=Initial or vs=Clean. When vs=Initial or vs=Clean, it is implementation-defined whether an instruction that writes a vector register or vector CSR but does not alter its contents causes vs to transition to Dirty.
[manual:machine_126 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] shows all the possible state transitions for the fs, vs, or xs status bits. Note that the standard floating-point and vector extensions do not support user-mode unconfigure or disable/enable instructions.
[manual:machine_127 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] Standard privileged instructions to initialize, save, and restore extension state are provided to insulate privileged code from details of the added extension state by treating the state as an opaque object.
[manual:machine_128 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] Many coprocessor extensions are only used in limited contexts that allows software to safely unconfigure or even disable units when done. This reduces the context-switch overhead of large stateful coprocessors.
[manual:machine_129 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] We separate out floating-point state from other extension state, as when a floating-point unit is present the floating-point registers are part of the standard calling convention, and so user-mode software cannot know when it is safe to disable the floating-point unit.
[manual:machine_130 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] The xs field provides a summary of all added extension state, but additional microarchitectural bits might be maintained in the extension to further reduce context save and restore overhead.
[manual:machine_131 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] The sd bit is read-only and is set when either the fs, vs, or xs bits encode a Dirty state (i.e., sd=(fs==0b11 OR xs==0b11 OR vs==0b11)). This allows privileged code to quickly determine when no additional context save is required beyond the integer register set and pc.
[manual:machine_132 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] The floating-point unit state is always initialized, saved, and restored using standard instructions (F, D, and/or Q), and privileged code must be aware of FLEN to determine the appropriate space to reserve for each f register.
[manual:machine_133 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] Machine and Supervisor modes share a single copy of the fs, vs, and xs bits. Supervisor-level software normally uses the fs, vs, and xs bits directly to record the status with respect to the supervisor-level saved context. Machine-level software must be more conservative in saving and restoring the extension state in their corresponding version of the context.
[manual:machine_134 · Machine › Extension Context Status in mstatus Register] In any reasonable use case, the number of context switches between user and supervisor level should far outweigh the number of context switches to other privilege levels. Note that coprocessors should not require their context to be saved and restored to service asynchronous interrupts, unless the interrupt results in a user-level context swap.
[manual:machine_135 · Machine › Previous Expected Landing Pad (ELP) State in mstatus Register] The ZICFILP extension adds the spelp and mpelp fields that hold the previous elp, and are updated as specified in. The _x_PELP fields are encoded as follows:
[manual:machine_136 · Machine › Previous Expected Landing Pad (ELP) State in mstatus Register] 0 - NO_LP_EXPECTED - no landing pad instruction expected. 1 - LP_EXPECTED - a landing pad instruction is expected.
[manual:machine_137 · Machine › Machine Trap-Vector Base-Address (mtvec) Register] The mtvec register is an MXLEN-bit WARL read/write register that holds trap vector configuration, consisting of a vector base address (base) and a vector mode (mode).
[manual:machine_138 · Machine › Machine Trap-Vector Base-Address (mtvec) Register] The mtvec register must always be implemented, but can contain a read-only value. If mtvec is writable, the set of values the register may hold can vary by implementation. The value in the base field must always be aligned on a 4-byte boundary, and the mode setting may impose additional alignment constraints on the value in the base field. Note that the CSR contains only bits XLEN-1 through 2 of the address base. When used as an address, the lower two bits are filled with zeroes to obtain an XLEN-bit address that is always aligned on a 4-byte boundary.
[manual:machine_139 · Machine › Machine Trap-Vector Base-Address (mtvec) Register] We allow for considerable flexibility in implementation of the trap vector base address. On the one hand, we do not wish to burden low-end implementations with a large number of state bits, but on the other hand, we wish to allow flexibility for larger systems.
[manual:machine_140 · Machine › Machine Trap-Vector Base-Address (mtvec) Register] The encoding of the mode field is shown in. When mode=Direct, all traps into machine mode cause the pc to be set to the address in the base field. When mode=Vectored, all synchronous exceptions into machine mode cause the pc to be set to the address in the base field, whereas interrupts cause the pc to be set to the address in the base field plus four times the interrupt cause number. For example, a machine-mode timer interrupt (see ) causes the pc to be set to base+0x1c.
[manual:machine_141 · Machine › Machine Trap-Vector Base-Address (mtvec) Register] An implementation may have different alignment constraints for different modes. In particular, mode=Vectored may have stricter alignment constraints than mode=Direct.
[manual:machine_142 · Machine › Machine Trap-Vector Base-Address (mtvec) Register] Allowing coarser alignments in Vectored mode enables vectoring to be implemented without a hardware adder circuit.
[manual:machine_143 · Machine › Machine Trap-Vector Base-Address (mtvec) Register] Reset and NMI vector locations are given in a platform specification.
[manual:machine_144 · Machine › Machine Trap Delegation (medeleg and mideleg) Registers] By default, all traps at any privilege level are handled in machine mode, though a machine-mode handler can redirect traps back to the appropriate level with the MRET instruction (). To increase performance, implementations can provide individual read/write bits within medeleg and mideleg to indicate that certain exceptions and interrupts should be processed directly by a lower privilege level. The machine exception delegation register (medeleg) is a 64-bit read/write register. The machine interrupt delegation (mideleg) register is an MXLEN-bit read/write register.
[manual:machine_145 · Machine › Machine Trap Delegation (medeleg and mideleg) Registers] In harts with S-mode, the medeleg and mideleg registers must exist, and setting a bit in medeleg or mideleg will delegate the corresponding trap, when occurring in S-mode or U-mode, to the S-mode trap handler. In harts without S-mode, the medeleg and mideleg registers should not exist.
[manual:machine_146 · Machine › Machine Trap Delegation (medeleg and mideleg) Registers] In versions 1.9.1 and earlier, these registers existed but were hardwired to zero in M-mode only, or M/U without N harts. There is no reason to require they return zero in those cases, as the misa register indicates whether they exist.
[manual:machine_147 · Machine › Machine Trap Delegation (medeleg and mideleg) Registers] When a trap is delegated to S-mode, the scause register is written with the trap cause; the sepc register is written with the virtual address of the instruction that took the trap; the stval register is written with an exception-specific datum; the spp field of mstatus is written with the active privilege mode at the time of the trap; the spie field of mstatus is written with the value of the sie field at the time of the trap; and the sie field of mstatus is cleared. The mcause, mepc, and mtval registers and the mpp and mpie fields of mstatus are not written.
[manual:machine_148 · Machine › Machine Trap Delegation (medeleg and mideleg) Registers] An implementation can choose to subset the delegatable traps, with the supported delegatable bits found by writing one to every bit location, then reading back the value in medeleg or mideleg to see which bit positions hold a one.
[manual:machine_149 · Machine › Machine Trap Delegation (medeleg and mideleg) Registers] An implementation shall not have any bits of medeleg be read-only one, i.e., any synchronous trap that can be delegated must support not being delegated. Similarly, an implementation shall not fix as read-only one any bits of mideleg corresponding to machine-level interrupts (but may do so for lower-level interrupts).
[manual:machine_150 · Machine › Machine Trap Delegation (medeleg and mideleg) Registers] Version 1.11 and earlier prohibited having any bits of mideleg be read-only one. Platform standards may always add such restrictions.
[manual:machine_151 · Machine › Machine Trap Delegation (medeleg and mideleg) Registers] Traps never transition from a more-privileged mode to a less-privileged mode. For example, if M-mode has delegated illegal-instruction exceptions to S-mode, and M-mode software later executes an illegal instruction, the trap is taken in M-mode, rather than being delegated to S-mode. By contrast, traps may be taken horizontally. Using the same example, if M-mode has delegated illegal-instruction exceptions to S-mode, and S-mode software later executes an illegal instruction, the trap is taken in S-mode.
[manual:machine_152 · Machine › Machine Trap Delegation (medeleg and mideleg) Registers] Delegated interrupts result in the interrupt being masked at the delegator privilege level. For example, if the supervisor timer interrupt (STI) is delegated to S-mode by setting mideleg[5], STIs will not be taken when executing in M-mode. By contrast, if mideleg[5] is clear, STIs can be taken in any mode and regardless of current mode will transfer control to M-mode.
[manual:machine_153 · Machine › Machine Trap Delegation (medeleg and mideleg) Registers] medeleg has a bit position allocated for every synchronous exception shown in, with the index of the bit position equal to the value returned in the mcause register (i.e., setting bit 8 allows user-mode environment calls to be delegated to a lower-privilege trap handler).
[manual:machine_154 · Machine › Machine Trap Delegation (medeleg and mideleg) Registers] When XLEN=32, medelegh is a 32-bit read/write register that aliases bits 63:32 of medeleg. The medelegh register does not exist when XLEN=64.
[manual:machine_155 · Machine › Machine Trap Delegation (medeleg and mideleg) Registers] mideleg holds trap delegation bits for individual interrupts, with the layout of bits matching those in the mip register (i.e., STIP interrupt delegation control is located in bit 5).
[manual:machine_156 · Machine › Machine Trap Delegation (medeleg and mideleg) Registers] For exceptions that cannot occur in less privileged modes, the corresponding medeleg bits should be read-only zero. In particular, medeleg[11] is read-only zero.
[manual:machine_157 · Machine › Machine Trap Delegation (medeleg and mideleg) Registers] The medeleg[16] is read-only zero as double trap is not delegatable.
[manual:machine_158 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] The mip register is an MXLEN-bit read/write register containing information on pending interrupts, while mie is the corresponding MXLEN-bit read/write register containing interrupt enable bits. Interrupt cause number i (as reported in CSR mcause, ) corresponds with bit i in both mip and mie. Bits 15:0 are allocated to standard interrupt causes only, while bits 16 and above are designated for platform use.
[manual:machine_159 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] NOTE: Interrupts designated for platform use may be designated for custom use at the platform's discretion.
[manual:machine_160 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] An interrupt i will trap to M-mode (causing the privilege mode to change to M-mode) if all of the following are true: (a) either the current privilege mode is M and the mie bit in the mstatus register is set, or the current privilege mode has less privilege than M-mode; (b) bit i is set in both mip and mie; and (c) if register mideleg exists, bit i is not set in mideleg.
[manual:machine_161 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] These conditions for an interrupt trap to occur must be evaluated in a bounded amount of time from when an interrupt becomes, or ceases to be, pending in mip, and must also be evaluated immediately following the execution of an _x_RET instruction or an explicit write to a CSR on which these interrupt trap conditions expressly depend (including mip, mie, mstatus, and mideleg).
[manual:machine_162 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] Interrupts to M-mode take priority over any interrupts to lower privilege modes.
[manual:machine_163 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] The mip register must always be implemented, but can contain read-only zeros in any position, indicating that interrupt can never become pending. Each individual bit in register mip may be writable or may be read-only. When bit i in mip is writable, a pending interrupt i can be cleared by writing 0 to this bit. If interrupt i can become pending but bit i in mip is read-only, the implementation must provide some other mechanism for clearing the pending interrupt.
[manual:machine_164 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] The mie register must always be implemented. A bit in mie must be writable if the corresponding interrupt can ever become pending. Bits of mie that are not writable must be read-only zero.
[manual:machine_165 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] The standard portions (bits 15:0) of the mip and mie registers are formatted as shown in and respectively.
[manual:machine_166 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] The machine-level interrupt registers handle a few root interrupt sources which are assigned a fixed service priority for simplicity, while separate external interrupt controllers can implement a more complex prioritization scheme over a much larger set of interrupts that are then multiplexed into the machine-level interrupt sources.
[manual:machine_167 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] The non-maskable interrupt is not made visible via the mip register as its presence is implicitly known when executing the NMI trap handler.
[manual:machine_168 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] Bits mip.meip and mie.meie are the interrupt-pending and interrupt-enable bits for machine-level external interrupts. meip is read-only in mip, and is set and cleared by a platform-specific interrupt controller.
[manual:machine_169 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] Bits mip.mtip and mie.mtie are the interrupt-pending and interrupt-enable bits for machine timer interrupts. mtip is read-only in the mip register, and is cleared by writing to the memory-mapped machine-mode timer compare register.
[manual:machine_170 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] Bits mip.msip and mie.msie are the interrupt-pending and interrupt-enable bits for machine-level software interrupts. msip is read-only in mip, and is written by accesses to memory-mapped control registers, which are used to provide machine-level interprocessor interrupts.
[manual:machine_171 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] A hart's memory-mapped msip register is a 32-bit read/write register, where bits 31{endash}1 read as zero and bit 0 contains the msip bit. When the memory-mapped msip register changes, it is guaranteed to be reflected in mip.msip eventually, but not necessarily immediately. If a system has only one hart, or if a platform standard supports the delivery of machine-level interprocessor interrupts through external interrupts (MEI) instead, then mip.msip and mie.msie may both be read-only zeros.
[manual:machine_172 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] If supervisor mode is not implemented, bits seip, stip, and ssip of mip and seie, stie, and ssie of mie are read-only zeros.
[manual:machine_173 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] If supervisor mode is implemented, bits mip.seip and mie.seie are the interrupt-pending and interrupt-enable bits for supervisor-level external interrupts. seip is writable in mip, and may be written by M-mode software to indicate to S-mode that an external interrupt is pending. Additionally, the platform-level interrupt controller may generate supervisor-level external interrupts. Supervisor-level external interrupts are made pending based on the logical-OR of the software-writable seip bit and the signal from the external interrupt controller. When mip is read with a CSR instruction, the value of the seip bit returned in the rd destination register is the logical-OR of the software-writable bit and the interrupt signal from the interrupt controller, but the signal from the interrupt controller is not used to calculate the value written to seip. Only the software-writable seip bit participates in the read-modify-write sequence of a CSRRS or CSRRC instruction.
[manual:machine_174 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] For example, if we name the software-writable seip bit B and the signal from the external interrupt controller E, then if CSRRS is executed, t0[9] is written with B || E, then B is written with B || t1[9]. If CSRRW is executed, then t0[9] is written with B || E, and B is simply written with t1[9]. In neither case does B depend upon E.
[manual:machine_175 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] The seip field behavior is designed to allow a higher privilege layer to mimic external interrupts cleanly, without losing any real external interrupts. The behavior of the CSR instructions is slightly modified from regular CSR accesses as a result.
[manual:machine_176 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] If supervisor mode is implemented, its mip.stip and mie.stie are the interrupt-pending and interrupt-enable bits for supervisor-level timer interrupts. If the stimecmp register is not implemented, stip is writable in mip, and may be written by M-mode software to deliver timer interrupts to S-mode. If the stimecmp (supervisor-mode timer compare) register is implemented, stip is read-only in mip and reflects the supervisor-level timer interrupt signal resulting from stimecmp. This timer interrupt signal is cleared by writing stimecmp with a value greater than the current time value.
[manual:machine_177 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] If supervisor mode is implemented, bits mip.ssip and mie.ssie are the interrupt-pending and interrupt-enable bits for supervisor-level software interrupts. ssip is writable in mip and may also be set to 1 by a platform-specific interrupt controller.
[manual:machine_178 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] If the SSCOFPMF extension is implemented, bits mip.lcofip and mie.lcofie are the interrupt-pending and interrupt-enable bits for local-counter-overflow interrupts. lcofip is read-write in mip and reflects the occurrence of a local counter-overflow overflow interrupt request resulting from any of the mhpmevent_n_.OF bits being set. If the SSCOFPMF extension is not implemented, mip.lcofip and mie.lcofie are read-only zeros.
[manual:machine_179 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] Multiple simultaneous interrupts destined for M-mode are handled in the following decreasing priority order: MEI, MSI, MTI, SEI, SSI, STI, LCOFI.
[manual:machine_180 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] The machine-level interrupt fixed-priority ordering rules were developed with the following rationale.
[manual:machine_181 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] Interrupts for higher privilege modes must be serviced before interrupts for lower privilege modes to support preemption.
[manual:machine_182 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] The platform-specific machine-level interrupt sources in bits 16 and above have platform-specific priority, but are typically chosen to have the highest service priority to support very fast local vectored interrupts.
[manual:machine_183 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] External interrupts are handled before internal (timer/software) interrupts as external interrupts are usually generated by devices that might require low interrupt service times.
[manual:machine_184 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] Software interrupts are handled before internal timer interrupts, because internal timer interrupts are usually intended for time slicing, where time precision is less important, whereas software interrupts are used for inter-processor messaging. Software interrupts can be avoided when high-precision timing is required, or high-precision timer interrupts can be routed via a different interrupt path. Software interrupts are located in the lowest four bits of mip as these are often written by software, and this position allows the use of a single CSR instruction with a five-bit immediate.
[manual:machine_185 · Machine › Machine Interrupt (mip and mie) Registers] Restricted views of the mip and mie registers appear as the sip and sie registers for supervisor level. If an interrupt is delegated to S-mode by setting a bit in the mideleg register, it becomes visible in the sip register and is maskable using the sie register. Otherwise, the corresponding bits in sip and sie are read-only zero.
[manual:machine_186 · Machine › Hardware Performance Monitor] M-mode includes a basic hardware performance-monitoring facility. The mcycle CSR counts the number of clock cycles executed by the processor core on which the hart is running. The minstret CSR counts the number of instructions the hart has retired. The mcycle and minstret registers have 64-bit precision on all RV32 and RV64 harts.
[manual:machine_187 · Machine › Hardware Performance Monitor] The counter registers have an arbitrary value after the hart is reset, and can be written with a given value. Any CSR write takes effect after the writing instruction has otherwise completed. The mcycle CSR may be shared between harts on the same core, in which case writes to mcycle will be visible to those harts. The platform should provide a mechanism to indicate which harts share an mcycle CSR.
[manual:machine_188 · Machine › Hardware Performance Monitor] The hardware performance monitor includes 29 additional 64-bit event counters, mhpmcounter3{endash}mhpmcounter31. The event selector CSRs, mhpmevent3{endash}mhpmevent31, are 64-bit WARL registers that control which event causes the corresponding counter to increment. The meaning of these events is defined by the platform, but event 0 is defined to mean "no event." All counters should be implemented, but a legal implementation is to make both the counter and its corresponding event selector be read-only 0.
[manual:machine_189 · Machine › Hardware Performance Monitor] The `mhpmcounter`s are WARL registers that support up to 64 bits of precision on RV32 and RV64.
[manual:machine_190 · Machine › Hardware Performance Monitor] When XLEN=32, reads of the mcycle, minstret, mhpmcounter_n, and mhpmeventn CSRs return bits 31-0 of the corresponding register, and writes change only bits 31-0; reads of the mcycleh, minstreth, mhpmcounternh, and mhpmeventnh CSRs return bits 63-32 of the corresponding register, and writes change only bits 63-32. The mhpmeventn_h CSRs are provided only if the SSCOFPMF extension is implemented.
[manual:machine_191 · Machine › Machine Counter-Enable (mcounteren) Register] The counter-enable mcounteren register is a 32-bit register that controls the availability of the hardware performance-monitoring counters to the next-lower privileged mode.
[manual:machine_192 · Machine › Machine Counter-Enable (mcounteren) Register] The settings in this register only control accessibility. The act of reading or writing this register does not affect the underlying counters, which continue to increment even when not accessible.
[manual:machine_193 · Machine › Machine Counter-Enable (mcounteren) Register] When the cy, tm, ir, or HPM_n bit in the mcounteren register is clear, attempts to read the cycle, time, instret, or hpmcountern_ register while executing in S-mode or U-mode will cause an illegal-instruction exception. When one of these bits is set, access to the corresponding register is permitted in the next implemented privilege mode (S-mode if implemented, otherwise U-mode).
[manual:machine_194 · Machine › Machine Counter-Enable (mcounteren) Register] The counter-enable bits support two common use cases with minimal hardware. For harts that do not need high-performance timers and counters, machine-mode software can trap accesses and implement all features in software. For harts that need high-performance timers and counters but are not concerned with obfuscating the underlying hardware counters, the counters can be directly exposed to lower privilege modes.
[manual:machine_195 · Machine › Machine Counter-Enable (mcounteren) Register] In addition, when the tm bit in the mcounteren register is clear, attempts to access the stimecmp or vstimecmp register while executing in a mode less privileged than M will cause an illegal-instruction exception. When this bit is set, access to the stimecmp or vstimecmp register is permitted in S-mode if implemented, and access to the vstimecmp register (via stimecmp) is permitted in VS-mode if implemented and not otherwise prevented by the tm bit in hcounteren.
[manual:machine_196 · Machine › Machine Counter-Enable (mcounteren) Register] The cycle, instret, and hpmcounter_n CSRs are read-only shadows of mcycle, minstret, and mhpmcountern, respectively. The time CSR is a read-only shadow of the memory-mapped mtime register. Analogously, when XLEN=32, the cycleh, instreth and hpmcounternh CSRs are read-only shadows of mcycleh, minstreth and mhpmcountern_h, respectively. When XLEN=32, the timeh CSR is a read-only shadow of the upper 32 bits of the memory-mapped mtime register, while time shadows only the lower 32 bits of mtime.
[manual:machine_197 · Machine › Machine Counter-Enable (mcounteren) Register] Implementations can convert reads of the time and timeh CSRs into loads to the memory-mapped mtime register, or emulate this functionality on behalf of less-privileged modes in M-mode software.
[manual:machine_198 · Machine › Machine Counter-Enable (mcounteren) Register] In harts with U-mode, the mcounteren must be implemented, but all fields are WARL and may be read-only zero, indicating reads to the corresponding counter will cause an illegal-instruction exception when executing in a less-privileged mode. In harts without U-mode, the mcounteren register should not exist.
[manual:machine_199 · Machine › Machine Counter-Inhibit (mcountinhibit) Register] The counter-inhibit register mcountinhibit is a 32-bit WARL register that controls which of the hardware performance-monitoring counters increment. The settings in this register only control whether the counters increment; their accessibility is not affected by the setting of this register.
[manual:machine_200 · Machine › Machine Counter-Inhibit (mcountinhibit) Register] When the cy, ir, or HPM_n bit in the mcountinhibit register is clear, the mcycle, minstret, or mhpmcountern register increments as usual. When the cy, ir, or HPMn_ bit is set, the corresponding counter does not increment.
[manual:machine_201 · Machine › Machine Counter-Inhibit (mcountinhibit) Register] The mcycle CSR may be shared between harts on the same core, in which case the mcountinhibit.cy field is also shared between those harts, and so writes to mcountinhibit.cy will be visible to those harts.
[manual:machine_202 · Machine › Machine Counter-Inhibit (mcountinhibit) Register] If the mcountinhibit register is not implemented, the implementation behaves as though the register were set to zero.
[manual:machine_203 · Machine › Machine Counter-Inhibit (mcountinhibit) Register] When the mcycle and minstret counters are not needed, it is desirable to conditionally inhibit them to reduce energy consumption. Providing a single CSR to inhibit all counters also allows the counters to be atomically sampled.
[manual:machine_204 · Machine › Machine Counter-Inhibit (mcountinhibit) Register] Because the mtime counter can be shared between multiple cores, it cannot be inhibited with the mcountinhibit mechanism.
[manual:machine_205 · Machine › Machine Scratch (mscratch) Register] The mscratch register is an MXLEN-bit read/write register dedicated for use by machine mode. The mscratch register must be implemented. Typically, it is used to hold a pointer to a machine-mode hart-local context space and swapped with a user register upon entry to an M-mode trap handler.
[manual:machine_206 · Machine › Machine Scratch (mscratch) Register] The MIPS ISA allocated two user registers (k0/k1) for use by the operating system. Although the MIPS scheme provides a fast and simple implementation, it also reduces available user registers, and does not scale to further privilege levels, or nested traps. It can also require both registers are cleared before returning to user level to avoid a potential security hole and to provide deterministic debugging behavior.
[manual:machine_207 · Machine › Machine Scratch (mscratch) Register] The RISC-V user ISA was designed to support many possible privileged system environments and so we did not want to infect the user-level ISA with any OS-dependent features. The RISC-V CSR swap instructions can quickly save/restore values to the mscratch register. Unlike the MIPS design, the OS can rely on holding a value in the mscratch register while the user context is running.
[manual:machine_208 · Machine › Machine Exception Program Counter (mepc) Register] mepc is an MXLEN-bit read/write register formatted as shown in. The low bit of mepc (mepc[0]) is always zero. On implementations that support only IALIGN=32, the two low bits (mepc[1:0]) are always zero.
[manual:machine_209 · Machine › Machine Exception Program Counter (mepc) Register] If an implementation allows IALIGN to be either 16 or 32 (by changing CSR misa, for example), then, whenever IALIGN=32, bit mepc[1] is masked on reads so that it appears to be 0. This masking occurs also for the implicit read by the MRET instruction. Though masked, mepc[1] remains writable when IALIGN=32.
[manual:machine_210 · Machine › Machine Exception Program Counter (mepc) Register] mepc is a WARL register that must be implemented and must be able to hold all valid virtual addresses. It need not be capable of holding all possible invalid addresses. Prior to writing mepc, implementations may convert an invalid address into some other invalid address that mepc is capable of holding.
[manual:machine_211 · Machine › Machine Exception Program Counter (mepc) Register] When address translation is not in effect, virtual addresses and physical addresses are equal. Hence, the set of addresses mepc must be able to represent includes the set of physical addresses that can be used as a valid pc or effective address.
[manual:machine_212 · Machine › Machine Exception Program Counter (mepc) Register] When a trap is taken into M-mode, mepc is written with the virtual address of the instruction that was interrupted or that encountered the exception. Otherwise, mepc is never written by the implementation, though it may be explicitly written by software.
[manual:machine_213 · Machine › Machine Cause (mcause) Register] The mcause register is an MXLEN-bit read-write register formatted as shown in. The mcause register must be implemented. When a trap is taken into M-mode, mcause is written with a code indicating the event that caused the trap. Otherwise, mcause is never written by the implementation, though it may be explicitly written by software.
[manual:machine_214 · Machine › Machine Cause (mcause) Register] The Interrupt bit in the mcause register is set if the trap was caused by an interrupt. The Exception Code field contains a code identifying the last exception or interrupt. lists the possible machine-level exception codes. The Exception Code is a WLRL field, so is only guaranteed to hold supported exception codes.
[manual:machine_215 · Machine › Machine Cause (mcause) Register] Note that load and load-reserved instructions generate load exceptions, whereas store, store-conditional, and AMO instructions generate store/AMO exceptions.
[manual:machine_216 · Machine › Machine Cause (mcause) Register] Interrupts can be separated from other traps with a single branch on the sign of the mcause register value. A shift left can remove the interrupt bit and scale the exception codes to index into a trap vector table.
[manual:machine_217 · Machine › Machine Cause (mcause) Register] We do not distinguish privileged instruction exceptions from illegal-instruction exceptions. This simplifies the architecture and also hides details of which higher-privilege instructions are supported by an implementation. The privilege level servicing the trap can implement a policy on whether these need to be distinguished, and if so, whether a given opcode should be treated as illegal or privileged.
[manual:machine_218 · Machine › Machine Cause (mcause) Register] If an instruction may raise multiple synchronous exceptions, the decreasing priority order of indicates which exception is taken and reported in mcause. The priority of any custom synchronous exceptions is implementation-defined.
[manual:machine_219 · Machine › Machine Cause (mcause) Register] When a virtual address is translated into a physical address, the address translation algorithm determines what specific exception may be raised.
[manual:machine_220 · Machine › Machine Cause (mcause) Register] Load/store/AMO address-misaligned exceptions may have either higher or lower priority than load/store/AMO page-fault and access-fault exceptions.
[manual:machine_221 · Machine › Machine Cause (mcause) Register] The relative priority of load/store/AMO address-misaligned and page-fault exceptions is implementation-defined to flexibly cater to two design points. Implementations that never support misaligned accesses can unconditionally raise the misaligned-address exception without performing address translation or protection checks. Implementations that support misaligned accesses only to some physical addresses must translate and check the address before determining whether the misaligned access may proceed, in which case raising the page-fault exception or access is more appropriate.
[manual:machine_222 · Machine › Machine Cause (mcause) Register] Instruction address breakpoints have the same cause value as, but different priority than, data address breakpoints (a.k.a. watchpoints) and environment break exceptions (which are raised by the EBREAK instruction).
[manual:machine_223 · Machine › Machine Cause (mcause) Register] Instruction address-misaligned exceptions are raised by control-flow instructions with misaligned targets, rather than by the act of fetching an instruction. Therefore, these exceptions have lower priority than other instruction address exceptions.
[manual:machine_224 · Machine › Machine Cause (mcause) Register] A software-check exception is a synchronous exception that is triggered when there are violations of checks and assertions defined by ISA extensions that aim to safeguard the integrity of software assets, including e.g. control-flow and memory-access constraints. When this exception is raised, the _x_tval register is set either to 0 or to an informative value defined by the extension that stipulated the exception be raised. The priority of this exception, relative to other synchronous exceptions, depends on the cause of this exception and is defined by the extension that stipulated the exception be raised.
[manual:machine_225 · Machine › Machine Cause (mcause) Register] A hardware-error exception is a synchronous exception triggered when corrupted or uncorrectable data is accessed explicitly or implicitly by an instruction. In this context, "data" encompasses all types of information used within a RISC-V hart. Upon a hardware-error exception, the _xepc register is set to the address of the instruction that attempted to access corrupted data, while the x_tval register is set either to 0 or to the virtual address of an instruction fetch, load, or store that attempted to access corrupted data. The priority of hardware-error exception is implementation-defined, but any given occurrence is generally expected to be recognized at the point in the overall priority order at which the hardware error is discovered.
[manual:machine_226 · Machine › Machine Trap Value (mtval) Register] The mtval register is an MXLEN-bit read-write register formatted as shown in. When a trap is taken into M-mode, mtval is either set to zero or written with exception-specific information to assist software in handling the trap. Otherwise, mtval is never written by the implementation, though it may be explicitly written by software. The hardware platform will specify which exceptions must set mtval informatively, which may unconditionally set it to zero, and which may exhibit either behavior, depending on the underlying event that caused the exception. The mtval register must always be implemented. If the hardware platform specifies that no exceptions set mtval to a nonzero value, then mtval is read-only zero.
[manual:machine_227 · Machine › Machine Trap Value (mtval) Register] If mtval is written with a nonzero value when a breakpoint, address-misaligned, access-fault, page-fault, or hardware-error exception occurs on an instruction fetch, load, or store, then mtval will contain the faulting virtual address.
[manual:machine_228 · Machine › Machine Trap Value (mtval) Register] On a breakpoint exception raised by an EBREAK or C.EBREAK instruction, mtval is written with either zero or the virtual address of the instruction.
[manual:machine_229 · Machine › Machine Trap Value (mtval) Register] NOTE: For breakpoint exceptions raised by [C.]EBREAK, the virtual address of the instruction is already recorded in mepc. Recording the same address in mtval is redundant; the option is provided for backwards compatibility.
[manual:machine_230 · Machine › Machine Trap Value (mtval) Register] When page-based virtual memory is enabled, mtval is written with the faulting virtual address, even for physical-memory access-fault exceptions. This design reduces datapath cost for most implementations, particularly those with hardware page-table walkers.
[manual:machine_231 · Machine › Machine Trap Value (mtval) Register] If mtval is written with a nonzero value when a misaligned load or store causes an access-fault, page-fault, or hardware-error exception, then mtval will contain the virtual address of the portion of the access that caused the fault.
[manual:machine_232 · Machine › Machine Trap Value (mtval) Register] If mtval is written with a nonzero value when an instruction access-fault, page-fault, or hardware-error exception occurs on a hart with variable-length instructions, then mtval will contain the virtual address of the portion of the instruction that caused the fault, while mepc will point to the beginning of the instruction.
[manual:machine_233 · Machine › Machine Trap Value (mtval) Register] The mtval register can optionally also be used to return the faulting instruction bits on an illegal-instruction exception (mepc points to the faulting instruction in memory). If mtval is written with a nonzero value when an illegal-instruction exception occurs, then mtval will contain the shortest of:
[manual:machine_234 · Machine › Machine Trap Value (mtval) Register] the first ILEN bits of the faulting instruction
[manual:machine_235 · Machine › Machine Trap Value (mtval) Register] the first MXLEN bits of the faulting instruction
[manual:machine_236 · Machine › Machine Trap Value (mtval) Register] The value loaded into mtval on an illegal-instruction exception is right-justified and all unused upper bits are cleared to zero.
[manual:machine_237 · Machine › Machine Trap Value (mtval) Register] Capturing the faulting instruction in mtval reduces the overhead of instruction emulation, potentially avoiding several partial instruction loads if the instruction is misaligned, and likely data cache misses or slow uncached accesses when loads are used to fetch the instruction into a data register. There is also a problem of atomicity if another agent is manipulating the instruction memory, as might occur in a dynamic translation system.
[manual:machine_238 · Machine › Machine Trap Value (mtval) Register] A requirement is that the entire instruction (or at least the first MXLEN bits) are fetched into mtval before taking the trap. This should not constrain implementations, which would typically fetch the entire instruction before attempting to decode the instruction, and avoids complicating software handlers.
[manual:machine_239 · Machine › Machine Trap Value (mtval) Register] A value of zero in mtval signifies either that the feature is not supported, or an illegal zero instruction was fetched. A load from the instruction memory pointed to by mepc can be used to distinguish these two cases (or alternatively, the system configuration information can be interrogated to install the appropriate trap handling before runtime).
[manual:machine_240 · Machine › Machine Trap Value (mtval) Register] On a trap caused by a software-check exception, the mtval register holds the cause for the exception. The following encodings are defined:
[manual:machine_241 · Machine › Machine Trap Value (mtval) Register] 0 - No information provided. 2 - Landing Pad Fault. Defined by the Zicfilp extension (). 3 - Shadow Stack Fault. Defined by the Zicfiss extension ().
[manual:machine_242 · Machine › Machine Trap Value (mtval) Register] For other traps, mtval is set to zero, but a future standard may redefine mtval’s setting for other traps.
[manual:machine_243 · Machine › Machine Trap Value (mtval) Register] If mtval is not read-only zero, it is a WARL register that must be able to hold all valid virtual addresses and the value zero. It need not be capable of holding all possible invalid addresses. Prior to writing mtval, implementations may convert an invalid address into some other invalid address that mtval is capable of holding. If the feature to return the faulting instruction bits is implemented, mtval must also be able to hold all values less than 2^_N_^, where N is the smaller of MXLEN and ILEN.
[manual:machine_244 · Machine › Machine Configuration Pointer (mconfigptr) Register] The mconfigptr register is an MXLEN-bit read-only CSR formatted as shown in, that holds the physical address of a configuration data structure. Software can traverse this data structure to discover information about the harts, the platform, and their configuration.
[manual:machine_245 · Machine › Machine Configuration Pointer (mconfigptr) Register] The pointer alignment in bits must be no smaller than MXLEN: i.e., if MXLEN is 8{times}_n_, then mconfigptr[log~2~n-1:0] must be zero.
[manual:machine_246 · Machine › Machine Configuration Pointer (mconfigptr) Register] The mconfigptr register must be implemented, but it may be zero to indicate the configuration data structure does not exist or that an alternative mechanism must be used to locate it.
[manual:machine_247 · Machine › Machine Configuration Pointer (mconfigptr) Register] The format and schema of the configuration data structure have yet to be standardized.
[manual:machine_248 · Machine › Machine Configuration Pointer (mconfigptr) Register] While the mconfigptr register will simply be hardwired in some implementations, other implementations may provide a means to configure the value returned on CSR reads. For example, mconfigptr might present the value of a memory-mapped register that is programmed by the platform or by M-mode software towards the beginning of the boot process.
[manual:machine_249 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] The menvcfg CSR is a 64-bit read/write register, formatted as shown in, that controls certain characteristics of the execution environment for modes less privileged than M.
[manual:machine_250 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] If bit FIOM (Fence of I/O implies Memory) is set to one in menvcfg, FENCE instructions executed in modes less privileged than M are modified so the requirement to order accesses to device I/O implies also the requirement to order main memory accesses. details the modified interpretation of FENCE instruction bits PI, PO, SI, and SO for modes less privileged than M when FIOM=1.
[manual:machine_251 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] Similarly, for modes less privileged than M when FIOM=1, if an atomic instruction that accesses a region ordered as device I/O has its aq and/or rl bit set, then that instruction is ordered as though it accesses both device I/O and memory.
[manual:machine_252 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] If S-mode is not supported, or if satp.MODE is read-only zero (always Bare), the implementation may make FIOM read-only zero.
[manual:machine_253 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] .Modified interpretation of FENCE predecessor and successor sets for modes less privileged than M when FIOM=1.
[manual:machine_254 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] Bit FIOM is needed in menvcfg so M-mode can emulate the hypervisor extension of, which has an equivalent FIOM bit in the hypervisor CSR henvcfg.
[manual:machine_255 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] The PBMTE bit controls whether the Svpbmt extension is available for use in S-mode and G-stage address translation (i.e., for page tables pointed to by satp or hgatp). When PBMTE=1, Svpbmt is available for S-mode and G-stage address translation. When PBMTE=0, the implementation behaves as though Svpbmt were not implemented. If Svpbmt is not implemented, PBMTE is read-only zero. Furthermore, for implementations with the hypervisor extension, henvcfg.PBMTE is read-only zero if menvcfg.PBMTE is zero.
[manual:machine_256 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] After changing menvcfg.PBMTE, executing an SFENCE.VMA instruction with rs1=x0 and rs2=x0 suffices to synchronize address-translation caches with respect to the altered interpretation of page-table entries' PBMT fields. See for additional synchronization requirements when the hypervisor extension is implemented.
[manual:machine_257 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] If the Svadu extension is implemented, the ADUE bit controls whether hardware updating of PTE A/D bits is enabled for S-mode and G-stage address translations. When ADUE=1, hardware updating of PTE A/D bits is enabled during S-mode address translation, and the implementation behaves as though the Svade extension were not implemented for S-mode address translation. When the hypervisor extension is implemented, if ADUE=1, hardware updating of PTE A/D bits is enabled during G-stage address translation, and the implementation behaves as though the Svade extension were not implemented for G-stage address translation. When ADUE=0, the implementation behaves as though Svade were implemented for S-mode and G-stage address translation. If Svadu is not implemented, ADUE is read-only zero. Furthermore, for implementations with the hypervisor extension, henvcfg.ADUE is read-only zero if menvcfg.ADUE is zero.
[manual:machine_258 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] After changing menvcfg.ADUE, executing an SFENCE.VMA instruction with rs1=x0 and rs2=x0 suffices to synchronize address-translation caches with respect to the altered interpretation of page-table entries' A/D bits. See for additional synchronization requirements when the hypervisor extension is implemented.
[manual:machine_259 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] NOTE: The Svade extension requires page-fault exceptions be raised when PTE A/D bits need be set, hence Svade is implemented when ADUE=0.
[manual:machine_260 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] If the Smcdeleg extension is implemented, the CDE (Counter Delegation Enable) bit controls whether Zicntr and Zihpm counters can be delegated to S-mode. When CDE=1, the Smcdeleg extension is enabled, see. When CDE=0, the Smcdeleg and Ssccfg extensions appear to be not implemented. If Smcdeleg is not implemented, CDE is read-only zero.
[manual:machine_261 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] The Sstc extension adds the STCE (STimecmp Enable) bit to menvcfg CSR. When the Sstc extension is not implemented, STCE is read-only zero. The STCE bit enables stimecmp for S-mode when set to one. When this extension is implemented and STCE in menvcfg is zero, an attempt to access stimecmp in a mode other than M-mode raises an illegal-instruction exception, STCE in henvcfg is read-only zero, and STIP in mip and sip reverts to its defined behavior as if this extension is not implemented. Further, if the H extension is implemented, then hip.VSTIP also reverts its defined behavior as if this extension is not implemented.
[manual:machine_262 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] The Zicboz extension adds the CBZE (Cache Block Zero instruction enable) field to menvcfg. When the CBZE field is set to 1, it enables execution of the cache block zero instruction, CBO.ZERO, in modes less privileged than M. Otherwise, the instruction raises an illegal-instruction exception in modes less privileged than M. When the Zicboz extension is not implemented, CBZE is read-only zero.
[manual:machine_263 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] The Zicbom extension adds the CBCFE (Cache Block Clean and Flush instruction Enable) field to menvcfg. When the CBCFE field is set to 1, it enables execution of the cache block clean instruction (CBO.CLEAN) and the cache block flush instruction (CBO.FLUSH) in modes less privileged than M. Otherwise, these instructions raise an illegal-instruction exception in modes less privileged than M. When the Zicbom extension is not implemented, CBCFE is read-only zero.
[manual:machine_264 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] The Zicbom extension adds the CBIE (Cache Block Invalidate instruction Enable) WARL field to menvcfg to control execution of the cache block invalidate instruction (CBO.INVAL) in modes less privileged than M. When CBIE is set to 0b00, the instruction raises an illegal-instruction exception in modes less privileged than M. When the Zicbom extension is not implemented, CBIE is read-only zero. The encoding 0b10 is reserved. When CBIE is set to 0b01 or 0b11, and when enabled for execution in modes less privileged than M, it behaves as follows:
[manual:machine_265 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] 0b01 -- The instruction is executed and performs a flush operation, even if configured by a mode less privileged than M to perform an invalidate operation. 0b11 -- The instruction is executed and performs an invalidate operation, unless configured by a mode less privileged than M to perform a flush operation.
[manual:machine_266 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] If the Smnpm extension is implemented, the PMM field enables or disables pointer masking (see ) for the next-lower privilege mode (S-/HS-mode if S-mode is implemented, or U-mode otherwise), according to the values in. If Smnpm is not implemented, PMM is read-only zero. The PMM field is read-only zero for RV32.
[manual:machine_267 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] The Zicfilp extension adds the LPE field in menvcfg. When the LPE field is set to 1 and S-mode is implemented, the Zicfilp extension is enabled in S-mode. If LPE field is set to 1 and S-mode is not implemented, the Zicfilp extension is enabled in U-mode. When the LPE field is 0, the Zicfilp extension is not enabled in S-mode, and the following rules apply to S-mode. If the LPE field is 0 and S-mode is not implemented, then the same rules apply to U-mode.
[manual:machine_268 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] The hart does not update the ELP state; it remains as NO_LP_EXPECTED. The LPAD instruction operates as a no-op.
[manual:machine_269 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] The Zicfiss extension adds the SSE field to menvcfg. When the SSE field is set to 1 the Zicfiss extension is activated in S-mode. When SSE field is 0, the following rules apply to privilege modes that are less than M:
[manual:machine_270 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] 32-bit Zicfiss instructions will revert to their behavior as defined by Zimop. 16-bit Zicfiss instructions will revert to their behavior as defined by Zcmop. The pte.xwr=0b010 encoding in VS/S-stage page tables becomes reserved. SSAMOSWAP.W/D raises an illegal-instruction exception.
[manual:machine_271 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] When menvcfg.SSE is 0, the henvcfg.SSE and senvcfg.SSE fields are read-only zero.
[manual:machine_272 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] The Ssdbltrp extension adds the double-trap-enable (DTE) field in menvcfg. When menvcfg.DTE is zero, the implementation behaves as though Ssdbltrp is not implemented. When Ssdbltrp is not implemented sstatus.SDT, vsstatus.SDT, and henvcfg.DTE bits are read-only zero.
[manual:machine_273 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] When XLEN=32, menvcfgh is a 32-bit read/write register that aliases bits 63:32 of menvcfg. The menvcfgh register does not exist when XLEN=64.
[manual:machine_274 · Machine › Machine Environment Configuration (menvcfg) Register] In harts with U-mode, menvcfg must be implemented, but all WARL fields may be read-only zero. For harts with S-mode and XLEN=32, menvcfgh must be similarly implemented. If U-mode is not supported, then registers menvcfg and menvcfgh do not exist.
[manual:machine_275 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] mseccfg is a 64-bit read/write register, formatted as shown in, that controls security features. It exists if any extension that adds a field to mseccfg is implemented. Otherwise, it is reserved.
[manual:machine_276 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] The Zkr extension adds the SSEED and USEED fields to the mseccfg CSR to control access to the seed CSR from modes less privileged than M.
[manual:machine_277 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] When USEED is 0, access to the seed CSR in U-mode raises an illegal-instruction exception. When USEED is 1, read-write access to the seed CSR from U-mode is allowed; all other types of accesses raise an illegal-instruction exception. If Zkr or U-mode is not implemented, USEED is read-only zero.
[manual:machine_278 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] When SSEED is 0, access to the seed CSR from S-/HS-mode raises an illegal-instruction exception. When SSEED is 1, read-write access to the seed CSR from S-/HS-mode is allowed; all other types of accesses raise an illegal-instruction exception. If Zkr or S-mode is not implemented, SSEED is read-only zero.
[manual:machine_279 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] When the H extension is also implemented, access to the seed CSR from an HS-qualified instruction leads to a virtual-instruction exception in VS and VU modes; all other types of accesses raise an illegal-instruction exception.
[manual:machine_280 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] .Entropy Source Access Control. |======================================================================= |Mode | SSEED | USEED | Description | M | - | - | The seed CSR is always available in machine mode as normal (with a CSR read-write instruction.) Attempted read without a write raises an illegal-instruction exception regardless of mode and access control bits. | U | - | 0 | Any seed CSR access raises an illegal-instruction exception. | U | - | 1 | The seed CSR is accessible as normal. No exception is raised for read-write. | S/HS | 0 | - | Any seed CSR access raises an illegal-instruction exception. | S/HS | 1 | - | The seed CSR is accessible as normal. No exception is raised for read-write. | VS/VU | 0 | - | Any seed CSR access raises an illegal-instruction exception. | VS/VU | 1 | - | A read-write seed access raises a virtual-instruction exception, while other access conditions raise an illegal-instruction exception. |=======================================================================
[manual:machine_281 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] The Smepmp extension adds the RLB, MMWP, and the MML fields in mseccfg.
[manual:machine_282 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] When mseccfg.RLB (Rule Locking Bypass) a WARL field that provides a mechanism to temporarily modify Locked PMP rules. When mseccfg.RLB is 1, locked PMP rules may be removed or modified and locked PMP rules may be edited. When mseccfg.RLB is 0 and pmpcfg.L is 1 in any rule or entry (including disabled entries), then mseccfg.RLB remains 0 and any further modifications to mseccfg.RLB are ignored until a PMP reset.
[manual:machine_283 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] This feature is intended to be used as a debug mechanism, or as a temporary workaround during the boot process for simplifying software, and optimizing the allocation of memory and PMP rules. Using this functionality under normal operation, after the boot process is completed, should be avoided since it weakens the protection of M-mode-only rules. Vendors who don’t need this functionality may hardwire this field to 0.
[manual:machine_284 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] The terminology used to specify the fields introduced by the Smepmp extension is listed in.
[manual:machine_285 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] The mseccfg.MMWP (Machine-Mode Allowlist Policy) is a WARL field. This field changes the default PMP policy for Machine mode when accessing memory regions that don't have a matching PMP rule. This is a sticky bit, meaning that once set it cannot be unset until a PMP reset. When set it changes the default PMP policy for M-mode when accessing memory regions that don’t have a matching PMP rule, to denied instead of ignored.
[manual:machine_286 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] The mseccfg.MML (Machine Mode Lockdown) is a WARL field. The MML bit changes the interpretation of the pmpcfg.L bit defined in. This is a sticky bit, meaning that once set it cannot be unset until a PMP reset. When mseccfg.MML is set the system's behavior changes in the following way:
[manual:machine_287 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] The meaning of pmpcfg.L changes: Instead of marking a rule as locked and enforced in all modes, it now marks a rule as M-mode-only when set and S/U-mode-only when unset. The formerly reserved encoding of pmpcfg.RW=01, and the encoding pmpcfg.LRWX=1111, now encode a Shared-Region. + + An M-mode-only rule is enforced on Machine mode and denied in Supervisor or User mode. It also remains locked so that any further modifications to its associated configuration or address registers are ignored until a PMP reset, unless mseccfg.RLB is set. + + An S/U-mode-only rule is enforced on Supervisor and User modes and denied on Machine mode. + + A Shared-Region rule is enforced on all modes, with restrictions depending on the pmpcfg.L and pmpcfg.X bits: + +
[manual:machine_288 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] A Shared-Region rule where pmpcfg.L is not set can be used for sharing data between M-mode and S/U-mode, so is not executable. M-mode has read/write access to that region, and S/U-mode has read access if pmpcfg.X is not set, or read/write access if pmpcfg.X is set. + A Shared-Region rule where pmpcfg.L is set can be used for sharing code between M-mode and S/U-mode, so is not writable. Both M-mode and S/U-mode have execute access on the region, and M-mode also has read access if pmpcfg.X is set. The rule remains locked so that any further modifications to its associated configuration or address registers are ignored until a PMP reset, unless mseccfg.RLB is set. + The encoding pmpcfg.LRWX=1111 can be used for sharing data between M-mode and S/U mode, where both modes only have read-only access to the region. The rule remains locked so that any further modifications to its associated configuration or address registers are ignored until a PMP reset, unless mseccfg.RLB is set.
[manual:machine_289 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] Adding a rule with executable privileges that either is M-mode-only or a locked Shared-Region is not possible and such pmpcfg writes are ignored, leaving pmpcfg unchanged. This restriction can be temporarily lifted by setting mseccfg.RLB e.g. during the boot process.
[manual:machine_290 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] Executing code with Machine mode privileges is only possible from memory regions with a matching M-mode-only rule or a locked Shared-Region rule with executable privileges. Executing code from a region without a matching rule or with a matching S/U-mode-only rule is denied.
[manual:machine_291 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] If mseccfg.MML is not set, the combination of pmpcfg.RW=01 remains reserved for future standard use.
[manual:machine_292 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] If the Smmpm extension is implemented, the PMM field enables or disables pointer masking (see ) for M-mode according to the values in. If Smmpm is not implemented, PMM is read-only zero. The PMM field is read-only zero for RV32.
[manual:machine_293 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] Smmpm implementations need to satisfy max(largest supported virtual address size, largest supported supervisor physical address size) <= (XLEN - PMLEN) bits to avoid any masking logic on the TLB access path.
[manual:machine_294 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] The Zicfilp extension adds the MLPE field in mseccfg. When MLPE field is 1, Zicfilp extension is enabled in M-mode. When the MLPE field is 0, the Zicfilp extension is not enabled in M-mode and the following rules apply to M-mode.
[manual:machine_295 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] The hart does not update the ELP state; it remains as NO_LP_EXPECTED. The LPAD instruction operates as a no-op.
[manual:machine_296 · Machine › Machine Security Configuration (mseccfg) Register] When XLEN=32 only, mseccfgh is a 32-bit read/write register that aliases bits 63:32 of mseccfg. Register mseccfgh exists when XLEN=32 and mseccfg is implemented; it does not exist when XLEN=64.
[manual:machine_297 · Machine › Machine Timer (mtime and mtimecmp) Registers] Platforms provide a real-time counter, exposed as a memory-mapped machine-mode read-write register, mtime. mtime must increment at constant frequency, and the platform must provide a mechanism for determining the period of an mtime tick. The mtime register will wrap around if the count overflows.
[manual:machine_298 · Machine › Machine Timer (mtime and mtimecmp) Registers] The mtime register has a 64-bit precision on all RV32 and RV64 systems. Platforms provide a 64-bit memory-mapped machine-mode timer compare register (mtimecmp). A machine timer interrupt becomes pending whenever mtime contains a value greater than or equal to mtimecmp, treating the values as unsigned integers. The interrupt remains posted until mtimecmp becomes greater than mtime (typically as a result of writing mtimecmp). The interrupt will only be taken if interrupts are enabled and the MTIE bit is set in the mie register.
[manual:machine_299 · Machine › Machine Timer (mtime and mtimecmp) Registers] The timer facility is defined to use wall-clock time rather than a cycle counter to support modern processors that run with a highly variable clock frequency to save energy through dynamic voltage and frequency scaling.
[manual:machine_300 · Machine › Machine Timer (mtime and mtimecmp) Registers] Accurate real-time clocks (RTCs) are relatively expensive to provide (requiring a crystal or MEMS oscillator) and have to run even when the rest of system is powered down, and so there is usually only one in a system located in a different frequency/voltage domain from the processors. Hence, the RTC must be shared by all the harts in a system and accesses to the RTC will potentially incur the penalty of a voltage-level-shifter and clock-domain crossing. It is thus more natural to expose mtime as a memory-mapped register than as a CSR.
[manual:machine_301 · Machine › Machine Timer (mtime and mtimecmp) Registers] Lower privilege levels do not have their own timecmp registers. Instead, machine-mode software can implement any number of virtual timers on a hart by multiplexing the next timer interrupt into the mtimecmp register.
[manual:machine_302 · Machine › Machine Timer (mtime and mtimecmp) Registers] Simple fixed-frequency systems can use a single clock for both cycle counting and wall-clock time.
[manual:machine_303 · Machine › Machine Timer (mtime and mtimecmp) Registers] If the result of the comparison between mtime and mtimecmp changes, it is guaranteed to be reflected in MTIP eventually, but not necessarily immediately.
[manual:machine_304 · Machine › Machine Timer (mtime and mtimecmp) Registers] A spurious timer interrupt might occur if an interrupt handler increments mtimecmp then immediately returns, because MTIP might not yet have fallen in the interim. All software should be written to assume this event is possible, but most software should assume this event is extremely unlikely. It is almost always more performant to incur an occasional spurious timer interrupt than to poll MTIP until it falls.
[manual:machine_305 · Machine › Machine Timer (mtime and mtimecmp) Registers] In RV32, memory-mapped writes to mtimecmp modify only one 32-bit part of the register. The following code sequence sets a 64-bit mtimecmp value without spuriously generating a timer interrupt due to the intermediate value of the comparand:
[manual:machine_306 · Machine › Machine Timer (mtime and mtimecmp) Registers] For RV64, naturally aligned 64-bit memory accesses to the mtime and mtimecmp registers are additionally supported and are atomic.
[manual:machine_307 · Machine › Machine Timer (mtime and mtimecmp) Registers] .Sample code for setting the 64-bit time comparand in RV32 assuming a little-endian memory system and that the registers live in a strongly ordered I/O region. Storing -1 to the low-order bits of mtimecmp prevents mtimecmp from temporarily becoming smaller than the lesser of the old and new values.
[manual:machine_308 · Machine › Machine Timer (mtime and mtimecmp) Registers] The time CSR is a read-only shadow of the memory-mapped mtime register. When XLEN=32, the timeh CSR is a read-only shadow of the upper 32 bits of the memory-mapped mtime register, while time shadows only the lower 32 bits of mtime. When mtime changes, it is guaranteed to be reflected in time and timeh eventually, but not necessarily immediately.
[manual:machine_309 · Machine › Environment Call and Breakpoint] The ECALL instruction is used to make a request to the supporting execution environment. When executed in U-mode, S-mode, or M-mode, it generates an environment-call-from-U-mode exception, environment-call-from-S-mode exception, or environment-call-from-M-mode exception, respectively, and performs no other operation.
[manual:machine_310 · Machine › Environment Call and Breakpoint] ECALL generates a different exception for each originating privilege mode so that environment call exceptions can be selectively delegated. A typical use case for Unix-like operating systems is to delegate to S-mode the environment-call-from-U-mode exception but not the others.
[manual:machine_311 · Machine › Environment Call and Breakpoint] The EBREAK instruction is used by debuggers to cause control to be transferred back to a debugging environment. Unless overridden by an external debug environment, EBREAK raises a breakpoint exception and performs no other operation.
[manual:machine_312 · Machine › Environment Call and Breakpoint] The insnlink:c.ebreak[] instruction performs the same operation as the EBREAK instruction.
[manual:machine_313 · Machine › Environment Call and Breakpoint] ECALL and EBREAK cause the receiving privilege mode’s epc register to be set to the address of the ECALL or EBREAK instruction itself, not the address of the following instruction. As ECALL and EBREAK cause synchronous exceptions, they are not considered to retire, and should not increment the minstret CSR.
[manual:machine_314 · Machine › Trap-Return Instructions] Instructions to return from trap are encoded under the PRIV minor opcode.
[manual:machine_315 · Machine › Trap-Return Instructions] To return after handling a trap, there are separate trap return instructions per privilege level, MRET and SRET. MRET is always provided. SRET must be provided if supervisor mode is supported, and should raise an illegal-instruction exception otherwise. SRET should also raise an illegal-instruction exception when TSR=1 in mstatus, as described in. An _x_RET instruction can be executed in privilege mode x or higher, where executing a lower-privilege _xRET instruction will pop the relevant lower-privilege interrupt enable and privilege mode stack. Attempting to execute an x_RET instruction in a mode less privileged than x will raise an illegal-instruction exception.
[manual:machine_316 · Machine › Trap-Return Instructions] In addition to manipulating the privilege stack as described in, _xRET sets the pc to the value stored in the x_epc register.
[manual:machine_317 · Machine › Trap-Return Instructions] If the Zalrsc extension is supported, the _xRET instruction is allowed to clear any outstanding LR address reservation but is not required to. Trap handlers should explicitly clear the reservation if required (e.g., by using a dummy SC) before executing the x_RET.
[manual:machine_318 · Machine › Trap-Return Instructions] If _x_RET instructions always cleared LR reservations, it would be impossible to single-step through LR/SC sequences using a debugger.
[manual:machine_319 · Machine › Wait for Interrupt] The Wait for Interrupt instruction (WFI) informs the implementation that the current hart can be stalled until an interrupt might need servicing. Execution of the WFI instruction can also be used to inform the hardware platform that suitable interrupts should preferentially be routed to this hart. WFI is available in all privileged modes, and optionally available to U-mode. This instruction may raise an illegal-instruction exception when TW=1 in mstatus, as described in.
[manual:machine_320 · Machine › Wait for Interrupt] If an enabled interrupt is present or later becomes present while the hart is stalled, the interrupt trap will be taken on the following instruction, i.e., execution resumes in the trap handler and mepc = pc + 4.
[manual:machine_321 · Machine › Wait for Interrupt] The following instruction takes the interrupt trap so that a simple return from the trap handler will execute code after the WFI instruction.
[manual:machine_322 · Machine › Wait for Interrupt] Implementations are permitted to resume execution for any reason, even if an enabled interrupt has not become pending. Hence, a legal implementation is to simply implement the WFI instruction as a NOP.
[manual:machine_323 · Machine › Wait for Interrupt] If the implementation does not stall the hart on execution of the instruction, then the interrupt will be taken on some instruction in the idle loop containing the WFI, and on a simple return from the handler, the idle loop will resume execution.
[manual:machine_324 · Machine › Wait for Interrupt] The WFI instruction can also be executed when interrupts are disabled. The operation of WFI must be unaffected by the global interrupt bits in mstatus (MIE and SIE) and the delegation register mideleg (i.e., the hart must resume if a locally enabled interrupt becomes pending, even if it has been delegated to a less-privileged mode), but should honor the individual interrupt enables (e.g, MTIE) (i.e., implementations should avoid resuming the hart if the interrupt is pending but not locally enabled). WFI is also required to resume execution for locally enabled interrupts pending at any privilege level, regardless of the global interrupt enable at each privilege level.
[manual:machine_325 · Machine › Wait for Interrupt] If the event that causes the hart to resume execution does not cause an interrupt to be taken, execution will resume at pc + 4, and software must determine what action to take, including looping back to repeat the WFI if there was no actionable event.
[manual:machine_326 · Machine › Wait for Interrupt] By allowing wake-up when interrupts are disabled, an alternate entry point to an interrupt handler can be called that does not require saving the current context, as the current context can be saved or discarded before the WFI is executed.
[manual:machine_327 · Machine › Wait for Interrupt] As implementations are free to implement WFI as a NOP, software must explicitly check for any relevant pending but disabled interrupts in the code following an WFI, and should loop back to the WFI if no suitable interrupt was detected. The mip or sip registers can be interrogated to determine the presence of any interrupt in machine or supervisor mode respectively.
[manual:machine_328 · Machine › Wait for Interrupt] The operation of WFI is unaffected by the delegation register settings.
[manual:machine_329 · Machine › Wait for Interrupt] WFI is defined so that an implementation can trap into a higher privilege mode, either immediately on encountering the WFI or after some interval to initiate a machine-mode transition to a lower power state, for example.
[manual:machine_330 · Machine › Wait for Interrupt] The same "wait-for-event" template might be used for possible future extensions that wait on memory locations changing, or message arrival.
[manual:machine_331 · Machine › Custom SYSTEM Instructions] The subspace of the SYSTEM major opcode shown in is designated for custom use. It is recommended that these instructions use bits 29:28 to designate the minimum required privilege mode, as do other SYSTEM instructions.
[manual:machine_332 · Machine › Reset] Upon reset, a hart’s privilege mode is set to M. The mstatus fields MIE and MPRV are reset to 0. If little-endian memory accesses are supported, the mstatus/mstatush field MBE is reset to 0. The misa register is reset to enable the maximal set of supported extensions, as described in. For implementations with the Zalrsc standard extension, there is no valid load reservation. The pc is set to an implementation-defined reset vector. The mcause register is set to a value indicating the cause of the reset. Writable PMP registers’ A and L fields are set to 0, unless the platform mandates a different reset value for some PMP registers’ A and L fields. If the hypervisor extension is implemented, the hgatp.MODE and vsatp.MODE fields are reset to 0. If the Smrnmi extension is implemented, the mnstatus.NMIE field is reset to 0. No WARL field contains an illegal value. If the Zicfilp extension is implemented, the mseccfg.MLPE field is reset to 0. All other hart state is UNSPECIFIED.
[manual:machine_333 · Machine › Reset] The MML, MMWP, and RLB fields of the mseccfg register are set to 0, unless the platform mandates a different reset value.
[manual:machine_334 · Machine › Reset] The mcause values after reset have implementation-specific interpretation, but the value 0 should be returned on implementations that do not distinguish different reset conditions. Implementations that distinguish different reset conditions should only use 0 to indicate the most complete reset.
[manual:machine_335 · Machine › Reset] The USEED and SSEED fields of the mseccfg CSR must have defined reset values. The system must not allow them to be in an undefined state after reset.
[manual:machine_336 · Machine › Reset] Some designs may have multiple causes of reset (e.g., power-on reset, external hard reset, brownout detected, watchdog timer elapse, sleep-mode wake-up), which machine-mode software and debuggers may wish to distinguish.
[manual:machine_337 · Machine › Reset] To avoid ambiguity, mcause reset values may alias mcause values following synchronous exceptions. There should be no ambiguity in this overlap, since on reset the pc is typically set to a different value than on other traps.
[manual:machine_338 · Machine › Non-Maskable Interrupts] Non-maskable interrupts (NMIs) are only used for hardware error conditions, and cause an immediate jump to an implementation-defined NMI vector running in M-mode regardless of the state of a hart’s interrupt enable bits. The mepc register is written with the virtual address of the instruction that was interrupted, and mcause is set to a value indicating the source of the NMI. The NMI can thus overwrite state in an active machine-mode interrupt handler.
[manual:machine_339 · Machine › Non-Maskable Interrupts] The values written to mcause on an NMI are implementation-defined. The high Interrupt bit of mcause should be set to indicate that this was an interrupt. An Exception Code of 0 is reserved to mean "unknown cause" and implementations that do not distinguish sources of NMIs via the mcause register should return 0 in the Exception Code.
[manual:machine_340 · Machine › Non-Maskable Interrupts] Unlike resets, NMIs do not reset processor state, enabling diagnosis, reporting, and possible containment of the hardware error.
[manual:machine_341 · Machine › Physical Memory Attributes] The physical memory map for a complete system includes various address ranges, some corresponding to memory regions and some to memory-mapped control registers, portions of which might not be accessible. Some memory regions might not support reads, writes, or execution; some might not support subword or subblock accesses; some might not support atomic operations; and some might not support cache coherence or might have different memory models. Similarly, memory-mapped control registers vary in their supported access widths, support for atomic operations, and whether read and write accesses have associated side effects. In RISC-V systems, these properties and capabilities of each region of the machine's physical address space are termed physical memory attributes (PMAs). This section describes RISC-V PMA terminology and how RISC-V systems implement and check PMAs.
[manual:machine_342 · Machine › Physical Memory Attributes] PMAs are inherent properties of the underlying hardware and rarely change during system operation. Unlike physical memory protection values described in, PMAs do not vary by execution context. The PMAs of some memory regions are fixed at chip design time—for example, for an on-chip ROM. Others are fixed at board design time, depending, for example, on which other chips are connected to off-chip buses. Off-chip buses might also support devices that could be changed on every power cycle (cold pluggable) or dynamically while the system is running (hot pluggable). Some devices might be configurable at run time to support different uses that imply different PMAs—for example, an on-chip scratchpad RAM might be cached privately by one core in one end-application, or accessed as a shared non-cached memory in another end-application.
[manual:machine_343 · Machine › Physical Memory Attributes] Most systems will require that at least some PMAs are dynamically checked in hardware later in the execution pipeline after the physical address is known, as some operations will not be supported at all physical memory addresses, and some operations require knowing the current setting of a configurable PMA attribute. While many other architectures specify some PMAs in the virtual memory page tables and use the TLB to inform the pipeline of these properties, this approach injects platform-specific information into a virtualized layer and can cause system errors unless attributes are correctly initialized in each page-table entry for each physical memory region. In addition, the available page sizes might not be optimal for specifying attributes in the physical memory space, leading to address-space fragmentation and inefficient use of expensive TLB entries.
[manual:machine_344 · Machine › Physical Memory Attributes] For RISC-V, we separate out specification and checking of PMAs into a separate hardware structure, the PMA checker. In many cases, the attributes are known at system design time for each physical address region, and can be hardwired into the PMA checker. Where the attributes are run-time configurable, platform-specific memory-mapped control registers can be provided to specify these attributes at a granularity appropriate to each region on the platform (e.g., for an on-chip SRAM that can be flexibly divided between cacheable and uncacheable uses). PMAs are checked for any access to physical memory, including accesses that have undergone virtual to physical memory translation. To aid in system debugging, we strongly recommend that, where possible, RISC-V processors precisely trap physical memory accesses that fail PMA checks. Precisely trapped PMA violations manifest as instruction, load, or store access-fault exceptions, distinct from virtual-memory page-fault exceptions. Precise PMA traps might not always be possible, for example, when probing a legacy bus architecture that uses access failures as part of the discovery mechanism. In this case, error responses from peripheral devices will be reported as imprecise bus-error interrupts.
[manual:machine_345 · Machine › Physical Memory Attributes] PMAs must also be readable by software to correctly access certain devices or to correctly configure other hardware components that access memory, such as DMA engines. As PMAs are tightly tied to a given physical platform’s organization, many details are inherently platform-specific, as is the means by which software can learn the PMA values for a platform. Some devices, particularly legacy buses, do not support discovery of PMAs and so will give error responses or time out if an unsupported access is attempted. Typically, platform-specific machine-mode code will extract PMAs and ultimately present this information to higher-level less-privileged software using some standard representation.
[manual:machine_346 · Machine › Physical Memory Attributes] Where platforms support dynamic reconfiguration of PMAs, an interface will be provided to set the attributes by passing requests to a machine-mode driver that can correctly reconfigure the platform. For example, switching cacheability attributes on some memory regions might involve platform-specific operations, such as cache flushes, that are available only to machine-mode.
[manual:machine_347 · Machine › Main Memory versus I/O Regions] The most important characterization of a given memory address range is whether it holds regular main memory or I/O devices. Regular main memory is required to have a number of properties, specified below, whereas I/O devices can have a much broader range of attributes. Memory regions that do not fit into regular main memory, for example, device scratchpad RAMs, are categorized as I/O regions.
[manual:machine_348 · Machine › Main Memory versus I/O Regions] NOTE: What previous versions of this specification termed vacant regions are no longer a distinct category; they are now described as I/O regions that are not accessible (i.e. lacking read, write, and execute permissions). Main memory regions that are not accessible are also allowed.
[manual:machine_349 · Machine › Supported Access Type PMAs] Access types specify which access widths, from 8-bit byte to long multi-word burst, are supported, and also whether misaligned accesses are supported for each access width.
[manual:machine_350 · Machine › Supported Access Type PMAs] Although software running on a RISC-V hart cannot directly generate bursts to memory, software might have to program DMA engines to access I/O devices and might therefore need to know which access sizes are supported.
[manual:machine_351 · Machine › Supported Access Type PMAs] Main memory regions always support read and write of all access widths required by the attached devices, and can specify whether instruction fetch is supported.
[manual:machine_352 · Machine › Supported Access Type PMAs] Some platforms might mandate that all of main memory support instruction fetch. Other platforms might prohibit instruction fetch from some main memory regions.
[manual:machine_353 · Machine › Supported Access Type PMAs] In some cases, the design of a processor or device accessing main memory might support other widths, but must be able to function with the types supported by the main memory.
[manual:machine_354 · Machine › Supported Access Type PMAs] I/O regions can specify which combinations of read, write, or execute accesses to which data widths are supported.
[manual:machine_355 · Machine › Supported Access Type PMAs] For systems with page-based virtual memory, I/O and memory regions can specify which combinations of hardware page-table reads and hardware page-table writes are supported.
[manual:machine_356 · Machine › Supported Access Type PMAs] Unix-like operating systems generally require that all of cacheable main memory supports page-table walks.
[manual:machine_357 · Machine › Atomicity PMAs] Atomicity PMAs describes which atomic instructions are supported in this address region. Support for atomic instructions is divided into two categories: LR/SC and AMOs.
[manual:machine_358 · Machine › Atomicity PMAs] Some platforms might mandate that all of cacheable main memory support all atomic operations required by the attached processors.
[manual:machine_359 · Machine › AMO PMA] Within AMOs, there are four levels of support: AMONone, AMOSwap, AMOLogical, and AMOArithmetic. AMONone indicates that no AMO operations are supported. AMOSwap indicates that only amoswap instructions are supported in this address range. AMOLogical indicates that swap instructions plus all the logical AMOs (amoand, amoor, amoxor) are supported. AMOArithmetic indicates that all RISC-V AMOs defined by the A extension are supported. For each level of support, naturally aligned AMOs of a given width are supported if the underlying memory region supports reads and writes of that width. Main memory and I/O regions may only support a subset or none of the processor-supported atomic operations.
[manual:machine_360 · Machine › AMO PMA] .Classes of AMOs supported by I/O regions. [i%autowidth,float="center",align="center",cols="<,<",options="header"]
[manual:machine_361 · Machine › AMO PMA] We recommend providing at least AMOLogical support for I/O regions where possible.
[manual:machine_362 · Machine › AMO PMA] The Zacas extension defines three additional levels of support: AMOCASW, AMOCASD, and AMOCASQ.
[manual:machine_363 · Machine › AMO PMA] AMOCASW indicates that in addition to instructions indicated by AMOArithmetic-level support, the AMOCAS.W instruction is supported. AMOCASD indicates that in addition to instructions indicated by AMOCASW-level support, the AMOCAS.D instruction is supported. AMOCASQ indicates that in addition to instructions indicated by AMOCASD-level support, the AMOCAS.Q instruction is supported.
[manual:machine_364 · Machine › AMO PMA] AMOCASW/D/Q require AMOArithmetic-level support as the AMOCAS.W/D/Q instructions require ability to perform an arithmetic comparison and a swap operation.
[manual:machine_365 · Machine › AMO PMA] The AMOs specified by the Zabha extension require the same level of support as the corresponding instructions in the Zaamo standard extension or the Zacas extension.
[manual:machine_366 · Machine › AMO PMA] The ZICCAMOA extension requires AMOArithmetic-level support to main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability PMAs.
[manual:machine_367 · Machine › AMO PMA] The ZICCAMOC extension requires AMOCASQ-level support to main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability PMAs.
[manual:machine_368 · Machine › Reservability PMA] For LR/SC, there are three levels of support indicating combinations of the reservability and eventuality properties: RsrvNone, RsrvNonEventual, and RsrvEventual. RsrvNone indicates that no LR/SC operations are supported (the location is non-reservable). RsrvNonEventual indicates that the operations are supported (the location is reservable), but without the eventual success guarantee described in the unprivileged ISA specification. RsrvEventual indicates that the operations are supported and provide the eventual success guarantee.
[manual:machine_369 · Machine › Reservability PMA] We recommend providing RsrvEventual support for main memory regions where possible. Most I/O regions will not support LR/SC accesses, as these are most conveniently built on top of a cache-coherence scheme, but some may support RsrvNonEventual or RsrvEventual.
[manual:machine_370 · Machine › Reservability PMA] When LR/SC is used for memory locations marked RsrvNonEventual, software should provide alternative fall-back mechanisms used when lack of progress is detected.
[manual:machine_371 · Machine › Reservability PMA] The ZICCRSE extension requires RsrvEventual support to main memory regions with both the coherence and cacheability PMAs.
[manual:machine_372 · Machine › Misaligned Atomicity Granule PMA] The misaligned atomicity granule PMA provides constrained support for misaligned AMOs. This PMA, if present, specifies the size of a misaligned atomicity granule, a naturally aligned power-of-two number of bytes. Specific supported values for this PMA are represented by MAG_NN_, e.g., MAG16 indicates the misaligned atomicity granule is at least 16 bytes.
[manual:machine_373 · Machine › Misaligned Atomicity Granule PMA] The misaligned atomicity granule PMA applies only to AMOs, loads and stores defined in the base ISAs, and loads and stores of no more than XLEN bits defined in the F, D, and Q extensions, and compressed encodings thereof. For an instruction in that set, if all accessed bytes lie within the same misaligned atomicity granule, the instruction will not raise an exception for reasons of address alignment, and the instruction will give rise to only one memory operation for the purposes of RVWMO--i.e., it will execute atomically.
[manual:machine_374 · Machine › Misaligned Atomicity Granule PMA] If a misaligned AMO accesses a region that does not specify a misaligned atomicity granule PMA, or if not all accessed bytes lie within the same misaligned atomicity granule, then an exception is raised. For regular loads and stores that access such a region or for which not all accessed bytes lie within the same atomicity granule, then either an exception is raised, or the access proceeds but is not guaranteed to be atomic. Implementations may raise access-fault exceptions instead of address-misaligned exceptions for some misaligned accesses, indicating the instruction should not be emulated by a trap handler.
[manual:machine_375 · Machine › Misaligned Atomicity Granule PMA] NOTE: LR/SC instructions are unaffected by this PMA and so always raise an exception when misaligned. Vector memory accesses are also unaffected, so might execute non-atomically even when contained within a misaligned atomicity granule. Implicit accesses are similarly unaffected by this PMA.
[manual:machine_376 · Machine › Misaligned Atomicity Granule PMA] The Zama16b extension requires MAG16 support to main memory regions.
[manual:machine_377 · Machine › Memory-Ordering PMAs] Regions of the address space are classified as either main memory or I/O for the purposes of ordering by the FENCE instruction and atomic-instruction ordering bits.
[manual:machine_378 · Machine › Memory-Ordering PMAs] Accesses by one hart to main memory regions are observable not only by other harts but also by other devices with the capability to initiate requests in the main memory system (e.g., DMA engines). Coherent main memory regions always have either the RVWMO or RVTSO memory model. Incoherent main memory regions have an implementation-defined memory model.
[manual:machine_379 · Machine › Memory-Ordering PMAs] Accesses by one hart to an I/O region are observable not only by other harts and bus mastering devices but also by the targeted I/O devices, and I/O regions may be accessed with either relaxed or strong ordering. Accesses to an I/O region with relaxed ordering are generally observed by other harts and bus mastering devices in a manner similar to the ordering of accesses to an RVWMO memory region, as discussed in the I/O Ordering section in. By contrast, accesses to an I/O region with strong ordering are generally observed by other harts and bus mastering devices in program order.
[manual:machine_380 · Machine › Memory-Ordering PMAs] Each strongly ordered I/O region specifies a numbered ordering channel, which is a mechanism by which ordering guarantees can be provided between different I/O regions. Channel 0 is used to indicate point-to-point strong ordering only, where only accesses by the hart to the single associated I/O region are strongly ordered.
[manual:machine_381 · Machine › Memory-Ordering PMAs] Channel 1 is used to provide global strong ordering across all I/O regions. Any accesses by a hart to any I/O region associated with channel 1 can only be observed to have occurred in program order by all other harts and I/O devices, including relative to accesses made by that hart to relaxed I/O regions or strongly ordered I/O regions with different channel numbers. In other words, any access to a region in channel 1 is equivalent to executing a fence io,io instruction before and after the instruction.
[manual:machine_382 · Machine › Memory-Ordering PMAs] Other larger channel numbers provide program ordering to accesses by that hart across any regions with the same channel number
[manual:machine_383 · Machine › Memory-Ordering PMAs] Systems might support dynamic configuration of ordering properties on each memory region.
[manual:machine_384 · Machine › Memory-Ordering PMAs] Strong ordering can be used to improve compatibility with legacy device driver code, or to enable increased performance compared to insertion of explicit ordering instructions when the implementation is known to not reorder accesses.
[manual:machine_385 · Machine › Memory-Ordering PMAs] Local strong ordering (channel 0) is the default form of strong ordering as it is often straightforward to provide if there is only a single in-order communication path between the hart and the I/O device.
[manual:machine_386 · Machine › Memory-Ordering PMAs] Generally, different strongly ordered I/O regions can share the same ordering channel without additional ordering hardware if they share the same interconnect path and the path does not reorder requests.
[manual:machine_387 · Machine › Coherence and Cacheability PMAs] Coherence is a property defined for a single physical address, and indicates that writes to that address by one agent will eventually be made visible to other coherent agents in the system. Coherence is not to be confused with the memory consistency model of a system, which defines what values a memory read can return given the previous history of reads and writes to the entire memory system. In RISC-V platforms, the use of hardware-incoherent regions is discouraged due to software complexity, performance, and energy impacts.
[manual:machine_388 · Machine › Coherence and Cacheability PMAs] The cacheability of a memory region should not affect the software view of the region except for differences reflected in other PMAs, such as main memory versus I/O classification, memory ordering, supported accesses and atomic operations, and coherence. For this reason, we treat cacheability as a platform-level setting managed by machine-mode software only.
[manual:machine_389 · Machine › Coherence and Cacheability PMAs] Where a platform supports configurable cacheability settings for a memory region, a platform-specific machine-mode routine will change the settings and flush caches if necessary, so the system is only incoherent during the transition between cacheability settings. This transitory state should not be visible to lower privilege levels.
[manual:machine_390 · Machine › Coherence and Cacheability PMAs] Coherence is straightforward to provide for a shared memory region that is not cached by any agent. The PMA for such a region would simply indicate it should not be cached in a private or shared cache.
[manual:machine_391 · Machine › Coherence and Cacheability PMAs] Coherence is also straightforward for read-only regions, which can be safely cached by multiple agents without requiring a cache-coherence scheme. The PMA for this region would indicate that it can be cached, but that writes are not supported.
[manual:machine_392 · Machine › Coherence and Cacheability PMAs] Some read-write regions might only be accessed by a single agent, in which case they can be cached privately by that agent without requiring a coherence scheme. The PMA for such regions would indicate they can be cached. The data can also be cached in a shared cache, as other agents should not access the region.
[manual:machine_393 · Machine › Coherence and Cacheability PMAs] If an agent can cache a read-write region that is accessible by other agents, whether caching or non-caching, a cache-coherence scheme is required to avoid use of stale values. In regions lacking hardware cache coherence (hardware-incoherent regions), cache coherence can be implemented entirely in software, but software coherence schemes are notoriously difficult to implement correctly and often have severe performance impacts due to the need for conservative software-directed cache-flushing. Hardware cache-coherence schemes require more complex hardware and can impact performance due to the cache-coherence probes, but are otherwise invisible to software.
[manual:machine_394 · Machine › Coherence and Cacheability PMAs] For each hardware cache-coherent region, the PMA would indicate that the region is coherent and which hardware coherence controller to use if the system has multiple coherence controllers. For some systems, the coherence controller might be an outer-level shared cache, which might itself access further outer-level cache-coherence controllers hierarchically.
[manual:machine_395 · Machine › Coherence and Cacheability PMAs] Most memory regions within a platform will be coherent to software, because they will be fixed as either uncached, read-only, hardware cache-coherent, or only accessed by one agent.
[manual:machine_396 · Machine › Coherence and Cacheability PMAs] If a PMA indicates non-cacheability, then accesses to that region must be satisfied by the memory itself, not by any caches.
[manual:machine_397 · Machine › Coherence and Cacheability PMAs] For implementations with a cacheability-control mechanism, the situation may arise that a program uncacheably accesses a memory location that is currently cache-resident. In this situation, the cached copy must be ignored. This constraint is necessary to prevent more-privileged modes’ speculative cache refills from affecting the behavior of less-privileged modes’ uncacheable accesses.
[manual:machine_398 · Machine › Idempotency PMAs] Idempotency PMAs describe whether reads and writes to an address region are idempotent. Main memory regions are assumed to be idempotent. For I/O regions, idempotency on reads and writes can be specified separately (e.g., reads are idempotent but writes are not). If accesses are non-idempotent, i.e., there is potentially a side effect on any read or write access, then speculative or redundant accesses must be avoided.
[manual:machine_399 · Machine › Idempotency PMAs] For the purposes of defining the idempotency PMAs, changes in observed memory ordering created by redundant accesses are not considered a side effect.
[manual:machine_400 · Machine › Idempotency PMAs] While hardware should always be designed to avoid speculative or redundant accesses to memory regions marked as non-idempotent, it is also necessary to ensure software or compiler optimizations do not generate spurious accesses to non-idempotent memory regions.
[manual:machine_401 · Machine › Idempotency PMAs] Non-idempotent regions might not support misaligned accesses. Misaligned accesses to such regions should raise access-fault exceptions rather than address-misaligned exceptions, indicating that software should not emulate the misaligned access using multiple smaller accesses, which could cause unexpected side effects.
[manual:machine_402 · Machine › Idempotency PMAs] For non-idempotent regions, implicit reads and writes must not be performed early or speculatively, with the following exceptions. When a non-speculative implicit read is performed, an implementation is permitted to additionally read any of the bytes within a naturally aligned power-of-2 region containing the address of the non-speculative implicit read. Furthermore, when a non-speculative instruction fetch is performed, an implementation is permitted to additionally read any of the bytes within the next naturally aligned power-of-2 region of the same size (with the address of the region taken modulo 2^XLEN^). The results of these additional reads may be used to satisfy subsequent early or speculative implicit reads. The size of these naturally aligned power-of-2 regions is implementation-defined, but, for systems with page-based virtual memory, must not exceed the smallest supported page size.
[manual:machine_403 · Machine › Physical Memory Protection] To support secure processing and contain faults, it is desirable to limit the physical addresses accessible by software running on a hart. An optional physical memory protection (PMP) unit provides per-hart machine-mode control registers to allow physical memory access privileges (read, write, execute) to be specified for each physical memory region. The PMP values are checked in parallel with the PMA checks described in.
[manual:machine_404 · Machine › Physical Memory Protection] The granularity of PMP access control settings are platform-specific, but the standard PMP encoding supports regions as small as four bytes. Certain regions’ privileges can be hardwired—for example, some regions might only ever be visible in machine mode but in no lower-privilege layers.
[manual:machine_405 · Machine › Physical Memory Protection] Platforms vary widely in demands for physical memory protection, and some platforms may provide other PMP structures in addition to or instead of the scheme described in this section.
[manual:machine_406 · Machine › Physical Memory Protection] PMP checks are applied to all accesses whose effective privilege mode is S or U, including instruction fetches and data accesses in S and U mode, and data accesses in M-mode when the MPRV bit in mstatus is set and the MPP field in mstatus contains S or U. PMP checks are also applied to page-table accesses for virtual-address translation, for which the effective privilege mode is S. Optionally, PMP checks may additionally apply to M-mode accesses, in which case the PMP registers themselves are locked, so that even M-mode software cannot change them until the hart is reset. In effect, PMP can grant permissions to S and U modes, which by default have none, and can revoke permissions from M-mode, which by default has full permissions.
[manual:machine_407 · Machine › Physical Memory Protection] PMP violations are always trapped precisely at the processor.
[manual:machine_408 · Machine › Physical Memory Protection CSRs] PMP entries are described by an 8-bit configuration register and one MXLEN-bit address register. Some PMP settings additionally use the address register associated with the preceding PMP entry. Up to 64 PMP entries are supported. Implementations may implement zero, 16, or 64 PMP entries; the lowest-numbered PMP entries must be implemented first. All PMP CSR fields are WARL and may be read-only zero. PMP CSRs are only accessible to M-mode.
[manual:machine_409 · Machine › Physical Memory Protection CSRs] The PMP configuration registers are densely packed into CSRs to minimize context-switch time. For RV32, sixteen CSRs, pmpcfg0–pmpcfg15, hold the configurations pmp0cfg–pmp63cfg for the 64 PMP entries, as shown in. For RV64, eight even-numbered CSRs, pmpcfg0, pmpcfg2, …, pmpcfg14, hold the configurations for the 64 PMP entries, as shown in. For RV64, the odd-numbered configuration registers, pmpcfg1, pmpcfg3, …, pmpcfg15, are illegal.
[manual:machine_410 · Machine › Physical Memory Protection CSRs] RV64 harts use pmpcfg2, rather than pmpcfg1, to hold configurations for PMP entries 8-15. This design reduces the cost of supporting multiple MXLEN values, since the configurations for PMP entries 8-11 appear in pmpcfg2[31:0] for both RV32 and RV64.
[manual:machine_411 · Machine › Physical Memory Protection CSRs] The PMP address registers are CSRs named pmpaddr0-pmpaddr63. Each PMP address register encodes bits 33-2 of a 34-bit physical address for RV32, as shown in. For RV64, each PMP address register encodes bits 55-2 of a 56-bit physical address, as shown in. Not all physical address bits may be implemented, and so the pmpaddr registers are WARL.
[manual:machine_412 · Machine › Physical Memory Protection CSRs] The Sv32 page-based virtual-memory scheme described in supports 34-bit physical addresses for RV32, so the PMP scheme must support addresses wider than XLEN for RV32. The Sv39 and Sv48 page-based virtual-memory schemes described in and support a 56-bit physical address space, so the RV64 PMP address registers impose the same limit.
[manual:machine_413 · Machine › Physical Memory Protection CSRs] shows the layout of a PMP configuration register. The R, W, and X bits, when set, indicate that the PMP entry permits read, write, and instruction execution, respectively. When one of these bits is clear, the corresponding access type is denied. The R, W, and X fields form a collective WARL field for which the combinations with R=0 and W=1 are reserved. The remaining two fields, A and L, are described in the following sections.
[manual:machine_414 · Machine › Physical Memory Protection CSRs] Attempting to fetch an instruction from a PMP region that does not have execute permissions raises an instruction access-fault exception. Attempting to execute a load, load-reserved, or cache-block management instruction which accesses a physical address within a PMP region without read permissions raises a load access-fault exception. Attempting to execute a store, store-conditional, AMO, or cache-block zero instruction which accesses a physical address within a PMP region without write permissions raises a store access-fault exception.
[manual:machine_415 · Machine › Address Matching] The A field in a PMP entry's configuration register encodes the address-matching mode of the associated PMP address register. The encoding of this field is shown in. When A=0, this PMP entry is disabled and matches no addresses. Two other address-matching modes are supported: naturally aligned power-of-2 regions (NAPOT), including the special case of naturally aligned four-byte regions (NA4); and the top boundary of an arbitrary range (TOR). These modes support four-byte granularity.
[manual:machine_416 · Machine › Address Matching] .Encoding of A field in PMP configuration registers.
[manual:machine_417 · Machine › Address Matching] NAPOT ranges make use of the low-order bits of the associated address register to encode the size of the range, as shown in.
[manual:machine_418 · Machine › Address Matching] .NAPOT range encoding in PMP address and configuration registers.
[manual:machine_419 · Machine › Address Matching] If TOR is selected, the associated address register forms the top of the address range, and the preceding PMP address register forms the bottom of the address range. If PMP entry _i_'s A field is set to TOR, the entry matches any address y such that pmpaddr~i-1~{le}_y_<`pmpaddr~i~ (irrespective of the value of pmpcfg~i-1~). If PMP entry 0's A field is set to TOR, zero is used for the lower bound, and so it matches any address y<pmpaddr~0~`.
[manual:machine_420 · Machine › Address Matching] If pmpaddr~i-1~{ge}pmpaddr~i~` and pmpcfg~i~.A`=TOR, then PMP entry i matches no addresses.
[manual:machine_421 · Machine › Address Matching] It is not possible to represent the address 2^XLEN+2^ as the top of a range, so, for example, in an RV32 system with 34-bit physical addresses, a TOR PMP cannot be used to give less-privileged modes access to the uppermost word of memory. Either a NAPOT PMP can be used, or that memory can be left inaccessible to less-privileged modes. If the supervisor manages memory at base-page granularity, just 0.00002% of the 16{nbsp}GiB address space is lost.
[manual:machine_422 · Machine › Address Matching] Although the PMP mechanism supports regions as small as four bytes, platforms may specify coarser PMP regions. In general, the PMP grain is 2^G+2^ bytes and must be the same across all PMP regions. When G {ge} 1, the NA4 mode is not selectable. When G {ge} 2 and pmpcfg~i~.A[1] is set, i.e. the mode is NAPOT, then bits pmpaddr~i~[G-2:0] read as all ones. When G {ge} 1 and pmpcfg~i~.A[1] is clear, i.e. the mode is OFF or TOR, then bits pmpaddr~i~[G-1:0] read as all zeros. Bits pmpaddr~i~[G-1:0] do not affect the TOR address-matching logic. Although changing pmpcfg~i~.A[1] affects the value read from pmpaddr~i~, it does not affect the underlying value stored in that register—in particular, pmpaddr~i~[G-1] retains its original value when pmpcfg~i~.A is changed from NAPOT to TOR/OFF then back to NAPOT.
[manual:machine_423 · Machine › Address Matching] Software may determine the PMP granularity by writing zero to pmp0cfg, then writing all ones to pmpaddr0, then reading back pmpaddr0. If G is the index of the least-significant bit set, the PMP granularity is 2^G+2^ bytes.
[manual:machine_424 · Machine › Locking and Privilege Mode] The L bit indicates that the PMP entry is locked, i.e., writes to the configuration register and associated address registers are ignored. Locked PMP entries remain locked until the hart is reset. If PMP entry i is locked, writes to `pmp_icfg and pmpaddri_ are ignored. Additionally, if PMP entry i is locked and pmp_icfg.A is set to TOR, writes to pmpaddr`i_-1 are ignored.
[manual:machine_425 · Machine › Locking and Privilege Mode] Setting the L bit locks the PMP entry even when the A field is set to OFF.
[manual:machine_426 · Machine › Locking and Privilege Mode] In addition to locking the PMP entry, the L bit indicates whether the R/W/X permissions are additionally enforced on M-mode accesses. When the L bit is set, these permissions are enforced for all privilege modes. When the L bit is clear, any M-mode access matching the PMP entry will succeed; the R/W/X permissions apply only to S and U modes.
[manual:machine_427 · Machine › Priority and Matching Logic] On some implementations, misaligned loads, stores, and instruction fetches may be decomposed into multiple memory operations, some of which may succeed before an access-fault exception occurs, as described in the RVWMO specification. PMP checking is performed on each memory operation independently. In particular, a portion of a misaligned store that passes the PMP check may become visible, even if another portion fails the PMP check. The same behavior may manifest for stores wider than XLEN bits (e.g., the FSD instruction in RV32D), even when the store address is naturally aligned.
[manual:machine_428 · Machine › Priority and Matching Logic] PMP entries are statically prioritized. The lowest-numbered PMP entry that matches any byte of a memory operation determines whether that operation succeeds or fails. The matching PMP entry must match all bytes of a memory operation, or the operation fails, irrespective of the L, R, W, and X bits. For example, if a PMP entry is configured to match the four-byte range 0xC–0xF, then an 8-byte access to the range 0x8–0xF will fail, assuming that PMP entry is the highest-priority entry that matches those addresses.
[manual:machine_429 · Machine › Priority and Matching Logic] If a PMP entry matches all bytes of a memory operation, then the L, R, W, and X bits determine whether the operation succeeds or fails. If the L bit is clear and the privilege mode of the access is M, the operation succeeds. Otherwise, if the L bit is set or the privilege mode of the access is S or U, then the operation succeeds only if the R, W, or X bit corresponding to the access type is set.
[manual:machine_430 · Machine › Priority and Matching Logic] If no PMP entry matches an M-mode memory operation, the operation succeeds. If no PMP entry matches an S-mode or U-mode memory operation, the operation fails if at least one PMP entry is implemented and succeeds otherwise.
[manual:machine_431 · Machine › Priority and Matching Logic] If at least one PMP entry is implemented, but all PMP entries’ A fields are set to OFF, then all S-mode and U-mode memory accesses will fail.
[manual:machine_432 · Machine › Priority and Matching Logic] Failed memory operations generate an instruction, load, or store access-fault exception. Note that a single instruction may generate multiple memory operations, which may not be mutually atomic. An access-fault exception is generated if at least one memory operation generated by an instruction fails, though other memory operations generated by that instruction may succeed with visible side effects. Notably, instructions that reference virtual memory are decomposed into multiple memory operations.
[manual:machine_433 · Machine › Physical Memory Protection and Paging] The Physical Memory Protection mechanism is designed to compose with the page-based virtual memory systems described in. When paging is enabled, instructions that access virtual memory may result in multiple physical-memory accesses, including implicit references to the page tables. The PMP checks apply to all of these accesses. The effective privilege mode for implicit page-table accesses is S.
[manual:machine_434 · Machine › Physical Memory Protection and Paging] Implementations with virtual memory are permitted to perform address translations speculatively and earlier than required by an explicit memory access, and are permitted to cache them in address translation cache structures—including possibly caching the identity mappings from effective address to physical address used in Bare translation modes and M-mode. The PMP settings for the resulting physical address may be checked (and possibly cached) at any point between the address translation and the explicit memory access. Hence, when the PMP settings are modified, M-mode software must synchronize the PMP settings with the virtual memory system and any PMP or address-translation caches. This is accomplished by executing an SFENCE.VMA instruction with rs1=x0 and rs2=x0, after the PMP CSRs are written. See for additional synchronization requirements when the hypervisor extension is implemented.
[manual:machine_435 · Machine › Physical Memory Protection and Paging] If page-based virtual memory is not implemented, memory accesses check the PMP settings synchronously, so no SFENCE.VMA is needed.
[manual:supervisor_0 · Supervisor-Level ISA, Version 1.13] This chapter describes the RISC-V supervisor-level architecture, which contains a common core that is used with various supervisor-level address translation and protection schemes.
[manual:supervisor_1 · Supervisor-Level ISA, Version 1.13] Supervisor mode is deliberately restricted in terms of interactions with underlying physical hardware, such as physical memory and device interrupts, to support clean virtualization. In this spirit, certain supervisor-level facilities, including requests for timer and interprocessor interrupts, are provided by implementation-specific mechanisms. In some systems, a supervisor execution environment (SEE) provides these facilities in a manner specified by a supervisor binary interface (SBI). Other systems supply these facilities directly, through some other implementation-defined mechanism.
[manual:supervisor_2 · Supervisor › Supervisor CSRs] A number of CSRs are provided for the supervisor.
[manual:supervisor_3 · Supervisor › Supervisor CSRs] The supervisor should only view CSR state that should be visible to a supervisor-level operating system. In particular, there is no information about the existence (or non-existence) of higher privilege levels (machine level or other) visible in the CSRs accessible by the supervisor.
[manual:supervisor_4 · Supervisor › Supervisor CSRs] Many supervisor CSRs are a subset of the equivalent machine-mode CSR, and the machine-mode chapter should be read first to help understand the supervisor-level CSR descriptions.
[manual:supervisor_5 · Supervisor › Supervisor Status (sstatus) Register] The sstatus register is an SXLEN-bit read/write register formatted as shown in when SXLEN=32 and when SXLEN=64. The sstatus register keeps track of the processor's current operating state.
[manual:supervisor_6 · Supervisor › Supervisor Status (sstatus) Register] The SPP bit indicates the privilege level at which a hart was executing before entering supervisor mode. When a trap is taken, SPP is set to 0 if the trap originated from user mode, or 1 otherwise. When an SRET instruction (see ) is executed to return from the trap handler, the privilege level is set to user mode if the SPP bit is 0, or supervisor mode if the SPP bit is 1; SPP is then set to 0.
[manual:supervisor_7 · Supervisor › Supervisor Status (sstatus) Register] The SIE bit enables or disables all interrupts in supervisor mode. When SIE is clear, interrupts are not taken while in supervisor mode. When the hart is running in user-mode, the value in SIE is ignored, and supervisor-level interrupts are enabled. The supervisor can disable individual interrupt sources using the sie CSR.
[manual:supervisor_8 · Supervisor › Supervisor Status (sstatus) Register] The SPIE bit indicates whether supervisor interrupts were enabled prior to trapping into supervisor mode. When a trap is taken into supervisor mode, SPIE is set to SIE, and SIE is set to 0. When an SRET instruction is executed, SIE is set to SPIE, then SPIE is set to 1.
[manual:supervisor_9 · Supervisor › Supervisor Status (sstatus) Register] The sstatus register is a subset of the mstatus register.
[manual:supervisor_10 · Supervisor › Supervisor Status (sstatus) Register] In a straightforward implementation, reading or writing any field in sstatus is equivalent to reading or writing the homonymous field in mstatus.
[manual:supervisor_11 · Supervisor › Base ISA Control in sstatus Register] The UXL field controls the value of XLEN for U-mode, termed UXLEN, which may differ from the value of XLEN for S-mode, termed SXLEN. The encoding of UXL is the same as that of the MXL field of misa, shown in.
[manual:supervisor_12 · Supervisor › Base ISA Control in sstatus Register] When SXLEN=32, the UXL field does not exist, and UXLEN=32. When SXLEN=64, it is a WARL field that encodes the current value of UXLEN. In particular, an implementation may make UXL be a read-only field whose value always ensures that UXLEN=SXLEN.
[manual:supervisor_13 · Supervisor › Base ISA Control in sstatus Register] If UXLEN≠SXLEN, instructions executed in the narrower mode must ignore source register operand bits above the configured XLEN, and must sign-extend results to fill the widest supported XLEN in the destination register.
[manual:supervisor_14 · Supervisor › Base ISA Control in sstatus Register] If UXLEN < SXLEN, user-mode instruction-fetch addresses and load and store effective addresses are taken modulo 2^UXLEN^. For example, when UXLEN=32 and SXLEN=64, user-mode memory accesses reference the lowest 4 GiB of the address space.
[manual:supervisor_15 · Supervisor › Base ISA Control in sstatus Register] Some HINT instructions are encoded as integer computational instructions that overwrite their destination register with its current value, e.g., c.addi x8, 0. When such a HINT is executed with XLEN < SXLEN and bits SXLEN..XLEN of the destination register not all equal to bit XLEN-1, it is implementation-defined whether bits SXLEN..XLEN of the destination register are unchanged or are overwritten with copies of bit XLEN-1.
[manual:supervisor_16 · Supervisor › Base ISA Control in sstatus Register] NOTE: This definition allows implementations to elide register write-back for some HINTs, while allowing them to execute other HINTs in the same manner as other integer computational instructions. The implementation choice is observable only by S-mode with SXLEN > UXLEN; it is invisible to U-mode.
[manual:supervisor_17 · Supervisor › Memory Privilege in sstatus Register] The MXR (Make eXecutable Readable) bit modifies the privilege with which loads access virtual memory. When MXR=0, only loads from pages marked readable (R=1 in ) will succeed. When MXR=1, loads from pages marked either readable or executable (R=1 or X=1) will succeed. MXR has no effect when page-based virtual memory is not in effect.
[manual:supervisor_18 · Supervisor › Memory Privilege in sstatus Register] The SUM (permit Supervisor User Memory access) bit modifies the privilege with which S-mode loads and stores access virtual memory. When SUM=0, S-mode memory accesses to pages that are accessible by U-mode (U=1 in ) will fault. When SUM=1, these accesses are permitted. SUM has no effect when page-based virtual memory is not in effect, nor when executing in U-mode. Note that S-mode can never execute instructions from user pages, regardless of the state of SUM.
[manual:supervisor_19 · Supervisor › Memory Privilege in sstatus Register] SUM is read-only 0 if satp.MODE is read-only 0.
[manual:supervisor_20 · Supervisor › Memory Privilege in sstatus Register] The SUM mechanism prevents supervisor software from inadvertently accessing user memory. Operating systems can execute the majority of code with SUM clear; the few code segments that should access user memory can temporarily set SUM.
[manual:supervisor_21 · Supervisor › Memory Privilege in sstatus Register] The SUM mechanism does not avail S-mode software of permission to execute instructions in user code pages. Legitimate use cases for execution from user memory in supervisor context are rare in general and nonexistent in POSIX environments. However, bugs in supervisors that lead to arbitrary code execution are much easier to exploit if the supervisor exploit code can be stored in a user buffer at a virtual address chosen by an attacker.
[manual:supervisor_22 · Supervisor › Memory Privilege in sstatus Register] Some non-POSIX single address space operating systems do allow certain privileged software to partially execute in supervisor mode, while most programs run in user mode, all in a shared address space. This use case can be realized by mapping the physical code pages at multiple virtual addresses with different permissions, possibly with the assistance of the instruction page-fault handler to direct supervisor software to use the alternate mapping.
[manual:supervisor_23 · Supervisor › Endianness Control in sstatus Register] The UBE bit is a WARL field that controls the endianness of explicit memory accesses made from U-mode, which may differ from the endianness of memory accesses in S-mode. An implementation may make UBE be a read-only field that always specifies the same endianness as for S-mode.
[manual:supervisor_24 · Supervisor › Endianness Control in sstatus Register] UBE controls whether explicit load and store memory accesses made from U-mode are little-endian (UBE=0) or big-endian (UBE=1).
[manual:supervisor_25 · Supervisor › Endianness Control in sstatus Register] UBE has no effect on instruction fetches, which are implicit memory accesses that are always little-endian.
[manual:supervisor_26 · Supervisor › Endianness Control in sstatus Register] For implicit accesses to supervisor-level memory management data structures, such as page tables, S-mode endianness always applies and UBE is ignored.
[manual:supervisor_27 · Supervisor › Endianness Control in sstatus Register] Standard RISC-V ABIs are expected to be purely little-endian-only or big-endian-only, with no accommodation for mixing endianness. Nevertheless, endianness control has been defined so as to permit an OS of one endianness to execute user-mode programs of the opposite endianness.
[manual:supervisor_28 · Supervisor › Previous Expected Landing Pad (ELP) State in sstatus Register] Access to the SPELP field, added by Zicfilp, accesses the homonymous fields of mstatus when V=0, and the homonymous fields of vsstatus when V=1.
[manual:supervisor_29 · Supervisor › Double Trap Control in sstatus Register] The S-mode-disable-trap (SDT) bit is a WARL field introduced by the Ssdbltrp extension to address double trap (See ) at privilege modes lower than M.
[manual:supervisor_30 · Supervisor › Double Trap Control in sstatus Register] When the SDT bit is set to 1 by an explicit CSR write, the SIE (Supervisor Interrupt Enable) bit is cleared to 0. This clearing occurs regardless of the value written, if any, to the SIE bit by the same write. The SIE bit can only be set to 1 by an explicit CSR write if the SDT bit is being set to 0 by the same write or is already 0.
[manual:supervisor_31 · Supervisor › Double Trap Control in sstatus Register] When a trap is to be taken into S-mode, if the SDT bit is currently 0, it is then set to 1, and the trap is delivered as expected. However, if SDT is already set to 1, then this is an unexpected trap. In the event of an unexpected trap, a double-trap exception trap is delivered into M-mode. To deliver this trap, the hart writes registers, except mcause and mtval2, with the same information that the unexpected trap would have written if it was taken into M-mode. The mtval2 register is then set to what would be otherwise written into the mcause register by the unexpected trap. The mcause register is set to 16, the double-trap exception code.
[manual:supervisor_32 · Supervisor › Double Trap Control in sstatus Register] An SRET instruction sets the SDT bit to 0.
[manual:supervisor_33 · Supervisor › Double Trap Control in sstatus Register] After a trap handler has saved the state, such as scause, sepc, and stval, needed for resuming from the trap and is reentrant, it should clear the SDT bit.
[manual:supervisor_34 · Supervisor › Double Trap Control in sstatus Register] Resetting the SDT by an SRET enables the trap handler to detect a double trap that may occur during the tail phase, where it restores critical state to return from a trap.
[manual:supervisor_35 · Supervisor › Double Trap Control in sstatus Register] The consequence of this specification is that if a critical error condition was caused by a guest-page fault, then the GPA will not be available in mtval2 when the double trap is delivered to M-mode. This condition arises if the HS-mode invokes a hypervisor virtual-machine load or store instruction when SDT is 1 and the instruction raises a guest-page fault. The use of such an instruction in this phase of trap handling is not common. However, not recording the GPA is considered benign because, if required, it can still be obtained -- albeit with added effort -- through the process of walking the page tables.
[manual:supervisor_36 · Supervisor › Double Trap Control in sstatus Register] For a double trap that originates in VS-mode, M-mode should redirect the exception to HS-mode by copying the values of M-mode CSRs updated by the trap to HS-mode CSRs and should use an MRET to resume execution at the address in stvec.
[manual:supervisor_37 · Supervisor › Double Trap Control in sstatus Register] Supervisor Software Events (SSE), an extension to the SBI, provide a mechanism for supervisor software to register and service system events emanating from an SBI implementation, such as firmware or a hypervisor. In the event of a double trap, HS-mode and M-mode can utilize the SSE mechanism to invoke a critical-error handler in VS-mode or S/HS-mode, respectively. Additionally, the implementation of an SSE protocol can be considered as an optional measure to aid in the recovery from such critical errors.
[manual:supervisor_38 · Supervisor › Supervisor Trap Vector Base Address (stvec) Register] The stvec register is an SXLEN-bit read/write register that holds trap vector configuration, consisting of a vector base address (BASE) and a vector mode (MODE).
[manual:supervisor_39 · Supervisor › Supervisor Trap Vector Base Address (stvec) Register] The BASE field in stvec is a WARL field that can hold any valid virtual or physical address, subject to the following alignment constraints: the address must be 4-byte aligned, and MODE settings other than Direct might impose additional alignment constraints on the value in the BASE field. Note that the CSR contains only bits XLEN-1 through 2 of the address BASE. When used as an address, the lower two bits are filled with zeroes to obtain an XLEN-bit address that is always aligned on a 4-byte boundary.
[manual:supervisor_40 · Supervisor › Supervisor Trap Vector Base Address (stvec) Register] The encoding of the MODE field is shown in. When MODE=Direct, all traps into supervisor mode cause the pc to be set to the address in the BASE field. When MODE=Vectored, all synchronous exceptions into supervisor mode cause the pc to be set to the address in the BASE field, whereas interrupts cause the pc to be set to the address in the BASE field plus four times the interrupt cause number. For example, a supervisor-mode timer interrupt (see ) causes the pc to be set to BASE+0x14. Setting MODE=Vectored may impose a stricter alignment constraint on BASE.
[manual:supervisor_41 · Supervisor › Supervisor Interrupt (sip and sie) Registers] The sip register is an SXLEN-bit read/write register containing information on pending interrupts, while sie is the corresponding SXLEN-bit read/write register containing interrupt enable bits. Interrupt cause number i (as reported in CSR scause, ) corresponds with bit i in both sip and sie. Bits 15:0 are allocated to standard interrupt causes only, while bits 16 and above are designated for platform use.
[manual:supervisor_42 · Supervisor › Supervisor Interrupt (sip and sie) Registers] An interrupt i will trap to S-mode if both of the following are true: (a) either the current privilege mode is S and the SIE bit in the sstatus register is set, or the current privilege mode has less privilege than S-mode; and (b) bit i is set in both sip and sie.
[manual:supervisor_43 · Supervisor › Supervisor Interrupt (sip and sie) Registers] These conditions for an interrupt trap to occur must be evaluated in a bounded amount of time from when an interrupt becomes, or ceases to be, pending in sip, and must also be evaluated immediately following the execution of an SRET instruction or an explicit write to a CSR on which these interrupt trap conditions expressly depend (including sip, sie and sstatus).
[manual:supervisor_44 · Supervisor › Supervisor Interrupt (sip and sie) Registers] Interrupts to S-mode take priority over any interrupts to lower privilege modes.
[manual:supervisor_45 · Supervisor › Supervisor Interrupt (sip and sie) Registers] Each individual bit in register sip may be writable or may be read-only. When bit i in sip is writable, a pending interrupt i can be cleared by writing 0 to this bit. If interrupt i can become pending but bit i in sip is read-only, the implementation must provide some other mechanism for clearing the pending interrupt (which may involve a call to the execution environment).
[manual:supervisor_46 · Supervisor › Supervisor Interrupt (sip and sie) Registers] A bit in sie must be writable if the corresponding interrupt can ever become pending. Bits of sie that are not writable are read-only zero.
[manual:supervisor_47 · Supervisor › Supervisor Interrupt (sip and sie) Registers] The standard portions (bits 15:0) of registers sip and sie are formatted as shown in Figures and respectively.
[manual:supervisor_48 · Supervisor › Supervisor Interrupt (sip and sie) Registers] Bits sip.SEIP and sie.SEIE are the interrupt-pending and interrupt-enable bits for supervisor-level external interrupts. If implemented, SEIP is read-only in sip, and is set and cleared by the execution environment, typically through a platform-specific interrupt controller.
[manual:supervisor_49 · Supervisor › Supervisor Interrupt (sip and sie) Registers] Bits sip.STIP and sie.STIE are the interrupt-pending and interrupt-enable bits for supervisor-level timer interrupts. If implemented, STIP is read-only in sip. When the Sstc extension is not implemented, STIP is set and cleared by the execution environment. When the Sstc extension is implemented, STIP reflects the timer interrupt signal resulting from stimecmp. The sip.STIP bit, in response to timer interrupts generated by stimecmp, is set by writing stimecmp with a value that is less than or equal to time, and is cleared by writing stimecmp with a value greater than time.
[manual:supervisor_50 · Supervisor › Supervisor Interrupt (sip and sie) Registers] Bits sip.SSIP and sie.SSIE are the interrupt-pending and interrupt-enable bits for supervisor-level software interrupts. If implemented, SSIP is writable in sip and may also be set to 1 by a platform-specific interrupt controller.
[manual:supervisor_51 · Supervisor › Supervisor Interrupt (sip and sie) Registers] If the Sscofpmf extension is implemented, bits sip.LCOFIP and sie.LCOFIE are the interrupt-pending and interrupt-enable bits for local-counter-overflow interrupts. LCOFIP is read-write in sip and reflects the occurrence of a local counter-overflow overflow interrupt request resulting from any of the mhpmevent_n_.OF bits being set. If the Sscofpmf extension is not implemented, sip.LCOFIP and sie.LCOFIE are read-only zeros.
[manual:supervisor_52 · Supervisor › Supervisor Interrupt (sip and sie) Registers] Interprocessor interrupts are sent to other harts by implementation-specific means, which will ultimately cause the SSIP bit to be set in the recipient hart’s sip register.
[manual:supervisor_53 · Supervisor › Supervisor Interrupt (sip and sie) Registers] Each standard interrupt type (SEI, STI, SSI, or LCOFI) may not be implemented, in which case the corresponding interrupt-pending and interrupt-enable bits are read-only zeros. All bits in sip and sie are WARL fields. The implemented interrupts may be found by writing one to every bit location in sie, then reading back to see which bit positions hold a one.
[manual:supervisor_54 · Supervisor › Supervisor Interrupt (sip and sie) Registers] The sip and sie registers are subsets of the mip and mie registers. Reading any implemented field, or writing any writable field, of sip/sie effects a read or write of the homonymous field of mip/mie.
[manual:supervisor_55 · Supervisor › Supervisor Interrupt (sip and sie) Registers] Bits 3, 7, and 11 of sip and sie correspond to the machine-mode software, timer, and external interrupts, respectively. Since most platforms will choose not to make these interrupts delegatable from M-mode to S-mode, they are shown as 0 in and.
[manual:supervisor_56 · Supervisor › Supervisor Interrupt (sip and sie) Registers] Multiple simultaneous interrupts destined for supervisor mode are handled in the following decreasing priority order: SEI, SSI, STI, LCOFI.
[manual:supervisor_57 · Supervisor › Supervisor Timers and Performance Counters] Supervisor software uses the same hardware performance monitoring facility as user-mode software, including the time, cycle, and instret CSRs. The implementation should provide a mechanism to modify the counter values.
[manual:supervisor_58 · Supervisor › Supervisor Timers and Performance Counters] The implementation must provide a facility for scheduling timer interrupts in terms of the real-time counter, time.
[manual:supervisor_59 · Supervisor › Counter-Enable (scounteren) Register] The counter-enable (scounteren) CSR is a 32-bit register that controls the availability of the hardware performance monitoring counters to U-mode.
[manual:supervisor_60 · Supervisor › Counter-Enable (scounteren) Register] When the CY, TM, IR, or HPM_n_ bit in the scounteren register is clear, attempts to read the cycle, time, instret, or hpmcountern register while executing in U-mode will cause an illegal-instruction exception. When one of these bits is set, access to the corresponding register is permitted.
[manual:supervisor_61 · Supervisor › Counter-Enable (scounteren) Register] scounteren must be implemented. However, any of the bits may be read-only zero, indicating reads to the corresponding counter will cause an exception when executing in U-mode. Hence, they are effectively WARL fields.
[manual:supervisor_62 · Supervisor › Counter-Enable (scounteren) Register] The setting of a bit in mcounteren does not affect whether the corresponding bit in scounteren is writable. However, U-mode may only access a counter if the corresponding bits in scounteren and mcounteren are both set.
[manual:supervisor_63 · Supervisor › Supervisor Scratch (sscratch) Register] The sscratch CSR is an SXLEN-bit read/write register, dedicated for use by the supervisor. Typically, sscratch is used to hold a pointer to the hart-local supervisor context while the hart is executing user code. At the beginning of a trap handler, software normally uses a CSRRW instruction to swap sscratch with an integer register to obtain an initial working register.
[manual:supervisor_64 · Supervisor › Supervisor Exception Program Counter (sepc) Register] sepc is an SXLEN-bit read/write CSR formatted as shown in. The low bit of sepc (sepc[0]) is always zero. On implementations that support only IALIGN=32, the two low bits (sepc[1:0]) are always zero.
[manual:supervisor_65 · Supervisor › Supervisor Exception Program Counter (sepc) Register] If an implementation allows IALIGN to be either 16 or 32 (by changing CSR misa, for example), then, whenever IALIGN=32, bit sepc[1] is masked on reads so that it appears to be 0. This masking occurs also for the implicit read by the SRET instruction. Though masked, sepc[1] remains writable when IALIGN=32.
[manual:supervisor_66 · Supervisor › Supervisor Exception Program Counter (sepc) Register] sepc is a WARL register that must be able to hold all valid virtual addresses. It need not be capable of holding all possible invalid addresses. Prior to writing sepc, implementations may convert an invalid address into some other invalid address that sepc is capable of holding.
[manual:supervisor_67 · Supervisor › Supervisor Exception Program Counter (sepc) Register] When a trap is taken into S-mode, sepc is written with the virtual address of the instruction that was interrupted or that encountered the exception. Otherwise, sepc is never written by the implementation, though it may be explicitly written by software.
[manual:supervisor_68 · Supervisor › Supervisor Cause (scause) Register] The scause CSR is an SXLEN-bit read-write register formatted as shown in. When a trap is taken into S-mode, scause is written with a code indicating the event that caused the trap. Otherwise, scause is never written by the implementation, though it may be explicitly written by software.
[manual:supervisor_69 · Supervisor › Supervisor Cause (scause) Register] The Interrupt bit in the scause register is set if the trap was caused by an interrupt. The Exception Code field contains a code identifying the last exception or interrupt. lists the possible exception codes for the current supervisor ISAs. The Exception Code is a WLRL field. It is required to hold the values 0–31 (i.e., bits 4–0 must be implemented), but otherwise it is only guaranteed to hold supported exception codes.
[manual:supervisor_70 · Supervisor › Supervisor Cause (scause) Register] .Supervisor cause (scause) register values after trap. Synchronous exception priorities are given by.
[manual:supervisor_71 · Supervisor › Supervisor Trap Value (stval) Register] The stval CSR is an SXLEN-bit read-write register formatted as shown in. When a trap is taken into S-mode, stval is written with exception-specific information to assist software in handling the trap. Otherwise, stval is never written by the implementation, though it may be explicitly written by software. The hardware platform will specify which exceptions must set stval informatively, which may unconditionally set it to zero, and which may exhibit either behavior, depending on the underlying event that caused the exception.
[manual:supervisor_72 · Supervisor › Supervisor Trap Value (stval) Register] If stval is written with a nonzero value when a breakpoint, address-misaligned, access-fault, page-fault, or hardware-error exception occurs on an instruction fetch, load, or store, then stval will contain the faulting virtual address.
[manual:supervisor_73 · Supervisor › Supervisor Trap Value (stval) Register] On a breakpoint exception raised by an EBREAK or C.EBREAK instruction, stval is written with either zero or the virtual address of the instruction.
[manual:supervisor_74 · Supervisor › Supervisor Trap Value (stval) Register] If stval is written with a nonzero value when a misaligned load or store causes an access-fault, page-fault, or hardware-error exception, then stval will contain the virtual address of the portion of the access that caused the fault.
[manual:supervisor_75 · Supervisor › Supervisor Trap Value (stval) Register] If stval is written with a nonzero value when an instruction access-fault, page-fault, or hardware-error exception occurs on a hart with variable-length instructions, then stval will contain the virtual address of the portion of the instruction that caused the fault, while sepc will point to the beginning of the instruction.
[manual:supervisor_76 · Supervisor › Supervisor Trap Value (stval) Register] The stval register can optionally also be used to return the faulting instruction bits on an illegal-instruction exception (sepc points to the faulting instruction in memory). If stval is written with a nonzero value when an illegal-instruction exception occurs, then stval will contain the shortest of:
[manual:supervisor_77 · Supervisor › Supervisor Trap Value (stval) Register] the actual faulting instruction the first ILEN bits of the faulting instruction the first SXLEN bits of the faulting instruction
[manual:supervisor_78 · Supervisor › Supervisor Trap Value (stval) Register] The value loaded into stval on an illegal-instruction exception is right-justified and all unused upper bits are cleared to zero.
[manual:supervisor_79 · Supervisor › Supervisor Trap Value (stval) Register] On a trap caused by a software-check exception, the stval register holds the cause for the exception. The following encodings are defined:
[manual:supervisor_80 · Supervisor › Supervisor Trap Value (stval) Register] 0 - No information provided. 2 - Landing Pad Fault. Defined by the Zicfilp extension (). 3 - Shadow Stack Fault. Defined by the Zicfiss extension ().
[manual:supervisor_81 · Supervisor › Supervisor Trap Value (stval) Register] For other traps, stval is set to zero, but a future standard may redefine stval’s setting for other traps.
[manual:supervisor_82 · Supervisor › Supervisor Trap Value (stval) Register] stval is a WARL register that must be able to hold all valid virtual addresses and the value 0. It need not be capable of holding all possible invalid addresses. Prior to writing stval, implementations may convert an invalid address into some other invalid address that stval is capable of holding. If the feature to return the faulting instruction bits is implemented, stval must also be able to hold all values less than 2^N^, where N is the smaller of SXLEN and ILEN.
[manual:supervisor_83 · Supervisor › Supervisor Environment Configuration (senvcfg) Register] The senvcfg CSR is an SXLEN-bit read/write register, formatted as shown in, that controls certain characteristics of the U-mode execution environment.
[manual:supervisor_84 · Supervisor › Supervisor Environment Configuration (senvcfg) Register] If bit FIOM (Fence of I/O implies Memory) is set to one in senvcfg, FENCE instructions executed in U-mode are modified so the requirement to order accesses to device I/O implies also the requirement to order main memory accesses. details the modified interpretation of FENCE instruction bits PI, PO, SI, and SO in U-mode when FIOM=1.
[manual:supervisor_85 · Supervisor › Supervisor Environment Configuration (senvcfg) Register] Similarly, for U-mode when FIOM=1, if an atomic instruction that accesses a region ordered as device I/O has its aq and/or rl bit set, then that instruction is ordered as though it accesses both device I/O and memory.
[manual:supervisor_86 · Supervisor › Supervisor Environment Configuration (senvcfg) Register] If satp.MODE is read-only zero (always Bare), the implementation may make FIOM read-only zero.
[manual:supervisor_87 · Supervisor › Supervisor Environment Configuration (senvcfg) Register] .Modified interpretation of FENCE predecessor and successor sets in U-mode when FIOM=1.
[manual:supervisor_88 · Supervisor › Supervisor Environment Configuration (senvcfg) Register] Bit FIOM exists for a specific circumstance when an I/O device is being emulated for U-mode and both of the following are true: (a) the emulated device has a memory buffer that should be I/O space but is actually mapped to main memory via address translation, and (b) multiple physical harts are involved in accessing this emulated device from U-mode.
[manual:supervisor_89 · Supervisor › Supervisor Environment Configuration (senvcfg) Register] A hypervisor running in S-mode without the benefit of the hypervisor extension of may need to emulate a device for U-mode if paravirtualization cannot be employed. If the same hypervisor provides a virtual machine (VM) with multiple virtual harts, mapped one-to-one to real harts, then multiple harts may concurrently access the emulated device, perhaps because: (a) the guest OS within the VM assigns device interrupt handling to one hart while the device is also accessed by a different hart outside of an interrupt handler, or (b) control of the device (or partial control) is being migrated from one hart to another, such as for interrupt load balancing within the VM. For such cases, guest software within the VM is expected to properly coordinate access to the (emulated) device across multiple harts using mutex locks and/or interprocessor interrupts as usual, which in part entails executing I/O fences. But those I/O fences may not be sufficient if some of the device ``I/O'' is actually main memory, unknown to the guest. Setting FIOM=1 modifies those fences (and all other I/O fences executed in U-mode) to include main memory, too.
[manual:supervisor_90 · Supervisor › Supervisor Environment Configuration (senvcfg) Register] Software can always avoid the need to set FIOM by never using main memory to emulate a device memory buffer that should be I/O space. However, this choice usually requires trapping all U-mode accesses to the emulated buffer, which might have a noticeable impact on performance. The alternative offered by FIOM is sufficiently inexpensive to implement that we consider it worth supporting even if only rarely enabled.
[manual:supervisor_91 · Supervisor › Supervisor Environment Configuration (senvcfg) Register] The Zicboz extension adds the CBZE (Cache Block Zero instruction enable) field to senvcfg. The CBZE field controls execution of the cache block zero instruction (CBO.ZERO) in U-mode. Execution of CBO.ZERO in U-mode is enabled only if execution of the instruction is enabled for use in S-mode and CBZE is set to 1; otherwise, an illegal-instruction exception is raised. When the Zicboz extension is not implemented, CBZE is read-only zero.
[manual:supervisor_92 · Supervisor › Supervisor Environment Configuration (senvcfg) Register] The Zicbom extension adds the CBCFE (Cache Block Clean and Flush instruction Enable) field to senvcfg to control execution of the CBO.CLEAN and CBO.FLUSH instructions in U-mode. Execution of these instructions in U-mode is enabled only if execution of these instructions is enabled for use in S-mode and CBCFE is set to 1; otherwise, an illegal-instruction exception is raised. When the Zicbom extension is not implemented, CBCFE is read-only zero.
[manual:supervisor_93 · Supervisor › Supervisor Environment Configuration (senvcfg) Register] The Zicbom extension adds the CBIE (Cache Block Invalidate instruction Enable) WARL field to senvcfg to control execution of the CBO.INVAL instruction in U-mode. The encoding 0b10 is reserved. When the Zicbom extension is not implemented, CBIE is read-only zero. Execution of CBO.INVAL in U-mode is enabled only if execution of the instruction is enabled for use in S-mode and CBIE is set to 0b01 or 0b11; otherwise, an illegal-instruction exception is raised.
[manual:supervisor_94 · Supervisor › Supervisor Environment Configuration (senvcfg) Register] If CBO.INVAL is enabled in S-mode to perform a flush operation, then when the instruction is enabled in U-mode it performs a flush operation, even if CBIE is set to 0b11. Otherwise, the instruction behaves as follows, depending on the CBIE encoding:
[manual:supervisor_95 · Supervisor › Supervisor Environment Configuration (senvcfg) Register] 0b01 -- The instruction is executed and performs a flush operation. 0b11 -- The instruction is executed and performs an invalidate operation.
[manual:supervisor_96 · Supervisor › Supervisor Environment Configuration (senvcfg) Register] If the Ssnpm extension is implemented, the PMM field enables or disables pointer masking (see ) for the next-lower privilege mode (U/VU), according to the values in. If Ssnpm is not implemented, PMM is read-only zero. The PMM field is read-only zero for RV32.
[manual:supervisor_97 · Supervisor › Supervisor Environment Configuration (senvcfg) Register] The Zicfilp extension adds the LPE field in senvcfg. When the LPE field is set to 1, the Zicfilp extension is enabled in VU/U-mode. When the LPE field is 0, the Zicfilp extension is not enabled in VU/U-mode and the following rules apply to VU/U-mode:
[manual:supervisor_98 · Supervisor › Supervisor Environment Configuration (senvcfg) Register] The hart does not update the ELP state; it remains as NO_LP_EXPECTED. The LPAD instruction operates as a no-op.
[manual:supervisor_99 · Supervisor › Supervisor Environment Configuration (senvcfg) Register] The Zicfiss extension adds the SSE field in senvcfg. When the SSE field is set to 1, the Zicfiss extension is activated in VU/U-mode. When the SSE field is 0, the Zicfiss extension remains inactive in VU/U-mode, and the following rules apply:
[manual:supervisor_100 · Supervisor › Supervisor Environment Configuration (senvcfg) Register] 32-bit Zicfiss instructions will revert to their behavior as defined by Zimop. 16-bit Zicfiss instructions will revert to their behavior as defined by Zcmop. When menvcfg.SSE is one, SSAMOSWAP.W/D raises an illegal-instruction exception in U-mode and a virtual-instruction exception in VU-mode.
[manual:supervisor_101 · Supervisor › Supervisor Address Translation and Protection (satp) Register] The satp CSR is an SXLEN-bit read/write register, formatted as shown in for SXLEN=32 and for SXLEN=64, which controls supervisor-mode address translation and protection. This register holds the physical page number (PPN) of the root page table, i.e., its supervisor physical address divided by 4 KiB; an address space identifier (ASID), which facilitates address-translation fences on a per-address-space basis; and the MODE field, which selects the current address-translation scheme. Further details on the access to this register are described in.
[manual:supervisor_102 · Supervisor › Supervisor Address Translation and Protection (satp) Register] .Supervisor address translation and protection (satp) register when SXLEN=32.
[manual:supervisor_103 · Supervisor › Supervisor Address Translation and Protection (satp) Register] Storing a PPN in satp, rather than a physical address, supports a physical address space larger than 4 GiB for RV32.
[manual:supervisor_104 · Supervisor › Supervisor Address Translation and Protection (satp) Register] The satp.PPN field might not be capable of holding all physical page numbers. Some platform standards might place constraints on the values satp.PPN may assume, e.g., by requiring that all physical page numbers corresponding to main memory be representable.
[manual:supervisor_105 · Supervisor › Supervisor Address Translation and Protection (satp) Register] .Supervisor address translation and protection (satp) register when SXLEN=64, for MODE values Bare, Sv39, Sv48, and Sv57.
[manual:supervisor_106 · Supervisor › Supervisor Address Translation and Protection (satp) Register] We store the ASID and the page table base address in the same CSR to allow the pair to be changed atomically on a context switch. Swapping them non-atomically could pollute the old virtual address space with new translations, or vice-versa. This approach also slightly reduces the cost of a context switch.
[manual:supervisor_107 · Supervisor › Supervisor Address Translation and Protection (satp) Register] shows the encodings of the MODE field when SXLEN=32 and SXLEN=64. When MODE=Bare, supervisor virtual addresses are equal to supervisor physical addresses, and there is no additional memory protection beyond the physical memory protection scheme described in. To select MODE=Bare, software must write zero to the remaining fields of satp (bits 30–0 when SXLEN=32, or bits 59–0 when SXLEN=64). Attempting to select MODE=Bare with a nonzero pattern in the remaining fields has an UNSPECIFIED effect on the value that the remaining fields assume and an UNSPECIFIED effect on address translation and protection behavior.
[manual:supervisor_108 · Supervisor › Supervisor Address Translation and Protection (satp) Register] When SXLEN=32, the satp encodings corresponding to MODE=Bare and ASID[8:7]=3 are designated for custom use, whereas the encodings corresponding to MODE=Bare and ASID[8:7]≠3 are reserved for future standard use. When SXLEN=64, all satp encodings corresponding to MODE=Bare are reserved for future standard use.
[manual:supervisor_109 · Supervisor › Supervisor Address Translation and Protection (satp) Register] Version 1.11 of this standard stated that the remaining fields in satp had no effect when MODE=Bare. Making these fields reserved facilitates future definition of additional translation and protection modes, particularly in RV32, for which all patterns of the existing MODE field have already been allocated.
[manual:supervisor_110 · Supervisor › Supervisor Address Translation and Protection (satp) Register] If an implementation supports the Svbare extension, then the satp register's MODE field must be capable of holding the value Bare.
[manual:supervisor_111 · Supervisor › Supervisor Address Translation and Protection (satp) Register] When SXLEN=32, the only other valid setting for MODE is Sv32, a paged virtual-memory scheme described in.
[manual:supervisor_112 · Supervisor › Supervisor Address Translation and Protection (satp) Register] When SXLEN=64, three paged virtual-memory schemes are defined: Sv39, Sv48, and Sv57, described in,, and, respectively. One additional scheme, Sv64, will be defined in a later version of this specification. The remaining MODE settings are reserved for future use and may define different interpretations of the other fields in satp.
[manual:supervisor_113 · Supervisor › Supervisor Address Translation and Protection (satp) Register] Implementations are not required to support all MODE settings, and if satp is written with an unsupported MODE, the entire write has no effect; no fields in satp are modified.
[manual:supervisor_114 · Supervisor › Supervisor Address Translation and Protection (satp) Register] The number of ASID bits is UNSPECIFIED and may be zero. The number of implemented ASID bits, termed ASIDLEN, may be determined by writing one to every bit position in the ASID field, then reading back the value in satp to see which bit positions in the ASID field hold a one. The least-significant bits of ASID are implemented first: that is, if ASIDLEN > 0, ASID[ASIDLEN-1:0] is writable. The maximal value of ASIDLEN, termed ASIDMAX, is 9 for Sv32 or 16 for Sv39, Sv48, and Sv57.
[manual:supervisor_115 · Supervisor › Supervisor Address Translation and Protection (satp) Register] For many applications, the choice of page size has a substantial performance impact. A large page size increases TLB reach and loosens the associativity constraints on virtually indexed, physically tagged caches. At the same time, large pages exacerbate internal fragmentation, wasting physical memory and possibly cache capacity.
[manual:supervisor_116 · Supervisor › Supervisor Address Translation and Protection (satp) Register] After much deliberation, we have settled on a conventional page size of 4 KiB for both RV32 and RV64. We expect this decision to ease the porting of low-level runtime software and device drivers. The TLB reach problem is ameliorated by transparent superpage support in modern operating systems. Additionally, multi-level TLB hierarchies are quite inexpensive relative to the multi-level cache hierarchies whose address space they map.
[manual:supervisor_117 · Supervisor › Supervisor Address Translation and Protection (satp) Register] The satp CSR is considered active when the effective privilege mode is S-mode or U-mode. Executions of the address-translation algorithm may only begin using a given value of satp when satp is active.
[manual:supervisor_118 · Supervisor › Supervisor Address Translation and Protection (satp) Register] Translations that began while satp was active are not required to complete or terminate when satp is no longer active, unless an SFENCE.VMA instruction matching the address and ASID is executed. The SFENCE.VMA instruction must be used to ensure that updates to the address-translation data structures are observed by subsequent implicit reads to those structures by a hart.
[manual:supervisor_119 · Supervisor › Supervisor Address Translation and Protection (satp) Register] Note that writing satp does not imply any ordering constraints between page-table updates and subsequent address translations, nor does it imply any invalidation of address-translation caches. If the new address space’s page tables have been modified, or if an ASID is reused, it may be necessary to execute an SFENCE.VMA instruction (see ) after, or in some cases before, writing satp.
[manual:supervisor_120 · Supervisor › Supervisor Address Translation and Protection (satp) Register] Not imposing upon implementations to flush address-translation caches upon satp writes reduces the cost of context switches, provided a sufficiently large ASID space.
[manual:supervisor_121 · Supervisor › Supervisor Timer (stimecmp) Register] The stimecmp CSR is a 64-bit register and has 64-bit precision on all RV32 and RV64 systems. In RV32 only, accesses to the stimecmp CSR access the low 32 bits, while accesses to the stimecmph CSR access the high 32 bits of stimecmp.
[manual:supervisor_122 · Supervisor › Supervisor Timer (stimecmp) Register] A supervisor timer interrupt becomes pending, as reflected in the STIP bit in the mip and sip registers whenever time contains a value greater than or equal to stimecmp, treating the values as unsigned integers. If the result of this comparison changes, it is guaranteed to be reflected in STIP eventually, but not necessarily immediately. The interrupt remains posted until stimecmp becomes greater than time, typically as a result of writing stimecmp. The interrupt will be taken based on the standard interrupt enable and delegation rules.
[manual:supervisor_123 · Supervisor › Supervisor Timer (stimecmp) Register] A spurious timer interrupt might occur if an interrupt handler advances stimecmp then immediately returns, because STIP might not yet have fallen in the interim. All software should be written to assume this event is possible, but most software should assume this event is extremely unlikely. It is almost always more performant to incur an occasional spurious timer interrupt than to poll STIP until it falls.
[manual:supervisor_124 · Supervisor › Supervisor Timer (stimecmp) Register] In systems in which a supervisor execution environment (SEE) provides timer facilities via an SBI function call, this SBI call will continue to support requests to schedule a timer interrupt. The SEE will simply make use of stimecmp, changing its value as appropriate. This ensures compatibility with existing S-mode software that uses this SEE facility, while new S-mode software takes advantage of stimecmp directly.)
[manual:supervisor_125 · Supervisor › Supervisor Instructions] In addition to the SRET instruction defined in, one new supervisor-level instruction is provided.
[manual:supervisor_126 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] The supervisor memory-management fence instruction SFENCE.VMA is used to synchronize updates to in-memory memory-management data structures with current execution. Instruction execution causes implicit reads and writes to these data structures; however, these implicit references are ordinarily not ordered with respect to explicit loads and stores. Executing an SFENCE.VMA instruction guarantees that any previous stores already visible to the current RISC-V hart are ordered before certain implicit references by subsequent instructions in that hart to the memory-management data structures. The specific set of operations ordered by SFENCE.VMA is determined by rs1 and rs2, as described below. SFENCE.VMA is also used to invalidate entries in the address-translation cache associated with a hart (see ). Further details on the behavior of this instruction are described in and.
[manual:supervisor_127 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] The SFENCE.VMA is used to flush any local hardware caches related to address translation. It is specified as a fence rather than a TLB flush to provide cleaner semantics with respect to which instructions are affected by the flush operation and to support a wider variety of dynamic caching structures and memory-management schemes. SFENCE.VMA is also used by higher privilege levels to synchronize page table writes and the address translation hardware.
[manual:supervisor_128 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] SFENCE.VMA orders only the local hart’s implicit references to the memory-management data structures.
[manual:supervisor_129 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] Consequently, other harts must be notified separately when the memory-management data structures have been modified. One approach is to use 1) a local data fence to ensure local writes are visible globally, then 2) an interprocessor interrupt to the other thread, then 3) a local SFENCE.VMA in the interrupt handler of the remote thread, and finally 4) signal back to originating thread that operation is complete. This is, of course, the RISC-V analog to a TLB shootdown.
[manual:supervisor_130 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] For the common case that the translation data structures have only been modified for a single address mapping (i.e., one page or superpage), rs1 can specify a virtual address within that mapping to effect a translation fence for that mapping only. Furthermore, for the common case that the translation data structures have only been modified for a single address-space identifier, rs2 can specify the address space. The behavior of SFENCE.VMA depends on rs1 and rs2 as follows:
[manual:supervisor_131 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] If _rs1=x0 and rs2_=x0, the fence orders all reads and writes made to any level of the page tables, for all address spaces. The fence also invalidates all address-translation cache entries, for all address spaces.
[manual:supervisor_132 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] If _rs1=x0 and rs2_{ne}`x0`, the fence orders all reads and writes made to any level of the page tables, but only for the address space identified by integer register rs2. Accesses to global mappings (see ) are not ordered. The fence also invalidates all address-translation cache entries matching the address space identified by integer register rs2, except for entries containing global mappings.
[manual:supervisor_133 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] If _rs1{ne}`x0 and rs2=x0`, the fence orders only reads and writes made to leaf page table entries corresponding to the virtual address in rs1_, for all address spaces. The fence also invalidates all address-translation cache entries that contain leaf page table entries corresponding to the virtual address in rs1, for all address spaces.
[manual:supervisor_134 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] If _rs1{ne}`x0 and rs2_{ne}x0`, the fence orders only reads and writes made to leaf page table entries corresponding to the virtual address in rs1, for the address space identified by integer register rs2. Accesses to global mappings are not ordered. The fence also invalidates all address-translation cache entries that contain leaf page table entries corresponding to the virtual address in rs1 and that match the address space identified by integer register rs2, except for entries containing global mappings.
[manual:supervisor_135 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] If the value held in rs1 is not a valid virtual address, then the SFENCE.VMA instruction has no effect. No exception is raised in this case.
[manual:supervisor_136 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] It is always legal to over-fence, e.g., by fencing only based on a subset of the bits in rs1 and/or rs2, and/or by simply treating all SFENCE.VMA instructions as having rs1=x0 and/or rs2=x0. For example, simpler implementations can ignore the virtual address in rs1 and the ASID value in rs2 and always perform a global fence. The choice not to raise an exception when an invalid virtual address is held in rs1 facilitates this type of simplification.
[manual:supervisor_137 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] When _rs2_{ne}`x0`, bits SXLEN-1:ASIDMAX of the value held in rs2 are reserved for future standard use. Until their use is defined by a standard extension, they should be zeroed by software and ignored by current implementations. Furthermore, if ASIDLEN<ASIDMAX, the implementation shall ignore bits ASIDMAX-1:ASIDLEN of the value held in rs2.
[manual:supervisor_138 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] An implicit read of the memory-management data structures may return any translation for an address that was valid at any time since the most recent SFENCE.VMA that subsumes that address. The ordering implied by SFENCE.VMA does not place implicit reads and writes to the memory-management data structures into the global memory order in a way that interacts cleanly with the standard RVWMO ordering rules. In particular, even though an SFENCE.VMA orders prior explicit accesses before subsequent implicit accesses, and those implicit accesses are ordered before their associated explicit accesses, SFENCE.VMA does not necessarily place prior explicit accesses before subsequent explicit accesses in the global memory order. These implicit loads also need not otherwise obey normal program order semantics with respect to prior loads or stores to the same address.
[manual:supervisor_139 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] A consequence of this specification is that an implementation may use any translation for an address that was valid at any time since the most recent SFENCE.VMA that subsumes that address.
[manual:supervisor_140 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] For example, if a leaf PTE is modified and the corresponding virtual address is accessed without a subsuming SFENCE.VMA having been executed in between, then either the new translation or any older translation since the last subsuming SFENCE.VMA was executed will be used. It is unpredictable which translation will be chosen from that set, and subsequent accesses to the same virtual address might use different translations from that set. But the behavior of such accesses is otherwise well defined.
[manual:supervisor_141 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] This property applies even if the virtual-address width for that translation differs from the width currently specified by satp.MODE. For a given virtual address and ASID, any translation since the last subsuming SFENCE.VMA might be used, even if that translation used a virtual address of a different width. Similarly, for a given virtual address, any global translation since the last subsuming SFENCE.VMA might be used, regardless of both ASID and virtual-address width.
[manual:supervisor_142 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] In a conventional TLB design, it is possible for multiple entries to match a single address if, for example, a page is upgraded to a superpage without first clearing the original non-leaf PTE’s valid bit and executing an SFENCE.VMA with _rs1_=x0. In this case, a similar remark applies: it is unpredictable whether the old non-leaf PTE or the new leaf PTE is used, but the behavior is otherwise well defined.
[manual:supervisor_143 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] Another consequence of this specification is that it is generally unsafe to update a PTE using a set of stores of a width less than the width of the PTE, as it is legal for the implementation to read the PTE at any time, including when only some of the partial stores have taken effect.
[manual:supervisor_144 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] This specification permits the caching of PTEs whose V (Valid) bit is clear. Operating systems must be written to cope with this possibility, but implementers are reminded that eagerly caching invalid PTEs will reduce performance by causing additional page faults.
[manual:supervisor_145 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] Implementations must only perform implicit reads of the translation data structures pointed to by the current contents of the satp register or a subsequent valid (V=1) translation data structure entry, and must only raise exceptions for implicit accesses that are generated as a result of instruction execution, not those that are performed speculatively.
[manual:supervisor_146 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] Changes to the sstatus fields SUM and MXR take effect immediately, without the need to execute an SFENCE.VMA instruction. Changing satp.MODE from Bare to other modes and vice versa also takes effect immediately, without the need to execute an SFENCE.VMA instruction. Likewise, changes to satp.ASID take effect immediately.
[manual:supervisor_147 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] The following common situations typically require executing an SFENCE.VMA instruction:
[manual:supervisor_148 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] When software recycles an ASID (i.e., reassociates it with a different page table), it should first change satp to point to the new page table using the recycled ASID, then execute SFENCE.VMA with _rs1_=x0 and rs2 set to the recycled ASID. Alternatively, software can execute the same SFENCE.VMA instruction while a different ASID is loaded into satp, provided the next time satp is loaded with the recycled ASID, it is simultaneously loaded with the new page table. If the implementation does not provide ASIDs, or software chooses to always use ASID 0, then after every satp write, software should execute SFENCE.VMA with _rs1_=x0. In the common case that no global translations have been modified, rs2 should be set to a register other than x0 but which contains the value zero, so that global translations are not flushed. If software modifies a non-leaf PTE, it should execute SFENCE.VMA with _rs1_=x0. If any PTE along the traversal path had its G bit set, rs2 must be x0; otherwise, rs2 should be set to the ASID for which the translation is being modified. If software modifies a leaf PTE, it should execute SFENCE.VMA with rs1 set to a virtual address within the page. If any PTE along the traversal path had its G bit set, rs2 must be x0; otherwise, rs2 should be set to the ASID for which the translation is being modified. For the special cases of increasing the permissions on a leaf PTE and changing an invalid PTE to a valid leaf, software may choose to execute the SFENCE.VMA lazily. After modifying the PTE but before executing SFENCE.VMA, either the new or old permissions will be used. In the latter case, a page-fault exception might occur, at which point software should execute SFENCE.VMA in accordance with the previous bullet point.
[manual:supervisor_149 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] If a hart employs an address-translation cache, that cache must appear to be private to that hart. In particular, the meaning of an ASID is local to a hart; software may choose to use the same ASID to refer to different address spaces on different harts.
[manual:supervisor_150 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] A future extension could redefine ASIDs to be global across the SEE, enabling such options as shared translation caches and hardware support for broadcast TLB shootdown. However, as OSes have evolved to significantly reduce the scope of TLB shootdowns using novel ASID-management techniques, we expect the local-ASID scheme to remain attractive for its simplicity and possibly better scalability.
[manual:supervisor_151 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] For implementations that make satp.MODE read-only zero (always Bare), attempts to execute an SFENCE.VMA instruction might raise an illegal-instruction exception.
[manual:supervisor_152 · Supervisor › Supervisor Memory-Management Fence Instruction] No SFENCE.VMA is required after enabling or disabling pointer masking (see ), as pointer masking applies to the effective address only and does not affect any memory-management data structures.
[manual:supervisor_153 · Supervisor › Sv32: Page-Based 32-bit Virtual-Memory Systems] When Sv32 is written to the MODE field in the satp register (see ), the supervisor operates in a 32-bit paged virtual-memory system. In this mode, supervisor and user virtual addresses are translated into supervisor physical addresses by traversing a radix-tree page table. Sv32 is supported when SXLEN=32 and is designed to include mechanisms sufficient for supporting modern Unix-based operating systems.
[manual:supervisor_154 · Supervisor › Sv32: Page-Based 32-bit Virtual-Memory Systems] The initial RISC-V paged virtual-memory architectures have been designed as straightforward implementations to support existing operating systems. We have architected page table layouts to support a hardware page-table walker. Software TLB refills are a performance bottleneck on high-performance systems, and are especially troublesome with decoupled specialized coprocessors. An implementation can choose to implement software TLB refills using a machine-mode trap handler as an extension to M-mode.
[manual:supervisor_155 · Supervisor › Sv32: Page-Based 32-bit Virtual-Memory Systems] Some ISAs architecturally expose virtually indexed, physically tagged caches, in that accesses to the same physical address via different virtual addresses might not be coherent unless the virtual addresses lie within the same cache set. Implicitly, this specification does not permit such behavior to be architecturally exposed.
[manual:supervisor_156 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] Sv32 implementations support a 32-bit virtual address space, divided into 4 KiB pages. An Sv32 virtual address is partitioned into a virtual page number (VPN) and page offset, as shown in. When Sv32 virtual memory mode is selected in the MODE field of the satp register, supervisor virtual addresses are translated into supervisor physical addresses via a two-level page table. The 20-bit VPN is translated into a 22-bit physical page number (PPN), while the 12-bit page offset is untranslated. The resulting supervisor-level physical addresses are then checked using any physical memory protection structures (), before being directly converted to machine-level physical addresses. If necessary, supervisor-level physical addresses are zero-extended to the number of physical address bits found in the implementation.
[manual:supervisor_157 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] For example, consider an RV32 system supporting 34 bits of physical address. When the value of satp.MODE is Sv32, a 34-bit physical address is produced directly, and therefore no zero extension is needed. When the value of satp.MODE is Bare, the 32-bit virtual address is translated (unmodified) into a 32-bit physical address, and then that physical address is zero-extended into a 34-bit machine-level physical address.
[manual:supervisor_158 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] Sv32 page tables consist of 2^10^ page-table entries (PTEs), each of four bytes. A page table is exactly the size of a page and must always be aligned to a page boundary. The physical page number of the root page table is stored in the satp register.
[manual:supervisor_159 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] The PTE format for Sv32 is shown in. The V bit indicates whether the PTE is valid; if it is 0, all other bits in the PTE are don’t-cares and may be used freely by software. The permission bits, R, W, and X, indicate whether the page is readable, writable, and executable, respectively. When all three are zero, the PTE is a pointer to the next level of the page table; otherwise, it is a leaf PTE. Writable pages must also be marked readable; the contrary combinations are reserved for future use. summarizes the encoding of the permission bits.
[manual:supervisor_160 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] Attempting to fetch an instruction from a page that does not have execute permissions raises a fetch page-fault exception. Attempting to execute a load, load-reserved, or cache-block management instruction whose effective address lies within a page without read permissions raises a load page-fault exception. Attempting to execute a store, store-conditional, AMO, or cache-block zero instruction instruction whose effective address lies within a page without write permissions raises a store page-fault exception.
[manual:supervisor_161 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] AMOs never raise load page-fault exceptions. Since any unreadable page is also unwritable, attempting to perform an AMO on an unreadable page always raises a store page-fault exception.
[manual:supervisor_162 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] The U bit indicates whether the page is accessible to user mode. U-mode software may only access the page when U=1. If the SUM bit in the sstatus register is set, supervisor mode software may also access pages with U=1. However, supervisor code normally operates with the SUM bit clear, in which case, supervisor code will fault on accesses to user-mode pages. Irrespective of SUM, the supervisor may not execute code on pages with U=1.
[manual:supervisor_163 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] An alternative PTE format would support different permissions for supervisor and user. We omitted this feature because it would be largely redundant with the SUM mechanism (see ) and would require more encoding space in the PTE.
[manual:supervisor_164 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] The G bit designates a global mapping. Global mappings are those that exist in all address spaces. For non-leaf PTEs, the global setting implies that all mappings in the subsequent levels of the page table are global. Note that failing to mark a global mapping as global merely reduces performance, whereas marking a non-global mapping as global is a software bug that, after switching to an address space with a different non-global mapping for that address range, can unpredictably result in either mapping being used.
[manual:supervisor_165 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] Global mappings need not be stored redundantly in address-translation caches for multiple ASIDs. Additionally, they need not be flushed from local address-translation caches when an SFENCE.VMA instruction is executed with _rs2_{ne}`x0`.
[manual:supervisor_166 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] The RSW field is reserved for use by supervisor software; the implementation shall ignore this field.
[manual:supervisor_167 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] Each leaf PTE contains an accessed (A) and dirty (D) bit. The A bit indicates the virtual page has been read, written, or fetched from since the last time the A bit was cleared. The D bit indicates the virtual page has been written since the last time the D bit was cleared.
[manual:supervisor_168 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] Two schemes to manage the A and D bits are defined:
[manual:supervisor_169 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] The Svade extension: when a virtual page is accessed and the A bit is clear, or is written and the D bit is clear, a page-fault exception is raised.
[manual:supervisor_170 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] When the Svade extension is not implemented, the following scheme applies. + + When a virtual page is accessed and the A bit is clear, the PTE is updated to set the A bit. When the virtual page is written and the D bit is clear, the PTE is updated to set the D bit. When G-stage address translation is in use and is not Bare, the G-stage virtual pages may be accessed or written by implicit accesses to VS-level memory management data structures, such as page tables. + + When two-stage address translation is in use, an explicit access may cause both VS-stage and G-stage PTEs to be updated. The following rules apply to all PTE updates caused by an explicit or an implicit memory accesses. + + The PTE update must be atomic with respect to other accesses to the PTE, and must atomically perform all page-table walk checks for that leaf PTE as part of, and before, conditionally updating the PTE value. Updates of the A bit may be performed as a result of speculation, even if the associated memory access ultimately is not performed architecturally. However, updates to the D bit, resulting from an explicit store, must be exact (i.e., non-speculative), and observed in program order by the local hart. When two-stage address translation is active, updates to the D bit in G-stage PTEs may be performed by an implicit access to a VS-stage PTE, if the G-stage PTE provides write permission, before any speculative access to the VS-stage PTE. + + The PTE update must appear in the global memory order before the memory access that caused the PTE update and before any subsequent explicit memory access to that virtual page by the local hart. The ordering on loads and stores provided by FENCE instructions and the acquire/release bits on atomic instructions also orders the PTE updates associated with those loads and stores as observed by remote harts. + + The PTE update is not required to be atomic with respect to the memory access that caused the update and a trap may occur between the PTE update and the memory access that caused the PTE update. If a trap occurs then the A and/or D bit may be updated but the memory access that caused the PTE update might not occur. The hart must not perform the memory access that caused the PTE update before the PTE update is globally visible. + + The page tables must be located in memory with hardware page-table write access and RsrvEventual PMA.
[manual:supervisor_171 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] All harts in a system must employ the same PTE-update scheme as each other.
[manual:supervisor_172 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] The PTE updates due to memory accesses ordered-after a FENCE are not themselves ordered by the FENCE.
[manual:supervisor_173 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] Simpler implementations may order the Page Table Entry (PTE) update to precede all subsequent explicit memory accesses, as opposed to ensuring that the PTE update is precisely sequenced before subsequent explicit memory accesses to the associated virtual page.
[manual:supervisor_174 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] Prior versions of this specification required PTE A bit updates to be exact, but allowing the A bit to be updated as a result of speculation simplifies the implementation of address translation prefetchers. System software typically uses the A bit as a page replacement policy hint, but does not require exactness for functional correctness. On the other hand, D bit updates are still required to be exact and performed in program order, as the D bit affects the functional correctness of page eviction.
[manual:supervisor_175 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] Implementations are of course still permitted to perform both A and D bit updates only in an exact manner.
[manual:supervisor_176 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] In both cases, requiring atomicity ensures that the PTE update will not be interrupted by other intervening writes to the page table, as such interruptions could lead to A/D bits being set on PTEs that have been reused for other purposes, on memory that has been reclaimed for other purposes, and so on. Simple implementations may instead generate page-fault exceptions.
[manual:supervisor_177 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] The A and D bits are never cleared by the implementation. If the supervisor software does not rely on accessed and/or dirty bits, e.g. if it does not swap memory pages to secondary storage or if the pages are being used to map I/O space, it should always set them to 1 in the PTE to improve performance.
[manual:supervisor_178 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] Any level of PTE may be a leaf PTE, so in addition to 4 KiB pages, Sv32 supports 4 MiB megapages. A megapage must be virtually and physically aligned to a 4 MiB boundary; a page-fault exception is raised if the physical address is insufficiently aligned.
[manual:supervisor_179 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] For non-leaf PTEs, the D, A, and U bits are reserved for future standard use. Until their use is defined by a standard extension, they must be cleared by software for forward compatibility.
[manual:supervisor_180 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] For implementations with both page-based virtual memory and the A standard extension, the LR/SC reservation set must lie completely within a single base physical page (i.e., a naturally aligned 4 KiB physical-memory region).
[manual:supervisor_181 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] On some implementations, misaligned loads, stores, and instruction fetches may also be decomposed into multiple accesses, some of which may succeed before a page-fault exception occurs. In particular, a portion of a misaligned store that passes the exception check may become visible, even if another portion fails the exception check. The same behavior may manifest for stores wider than XLEN bits (e.g., the FSD instruction in RV32D), even when the store address is naturally aligned.
[manual:supervisor_182 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] A virtual address va is translated into a physical address pa as follows:
[manual:supervisor_183 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] Let a be `satp._ppn×PAGESIZE, and let i_=LEVELS-1. (For Sv32, PAGESIZE=2^12^ and LEVELS=2.) The satp` register must be active, i.e., the effective privilege mode must be S-mode or U-mode.
[manual:supervisor_184 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] Let pte be the value of the PTE at address _a+va.vpn[i_]×PTESIZE. (For Sv32, PTESIZE=4.) If accessing pte violates a PMA or PMP check, raise an access-fault exception corresponding to the original access type.
[manual:supervisor_185 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] If pte.v=0, or if pte.r=0 and pte.w=1, or if any bits or encodings that are reserved for future standard use are set within pte, stop and raise a page-fault exception corresponding to the original access type.
[manual:supervisor_186 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] Otherwise, the PTE is valid. If _pte.r=1 or pte.x=1, go to step 5. Otherwise, this PTE is a pointer to the next level of the page table. Let i=i-1. If i<0, stop and raise a page-fault exception corresponding to the original access type. Otherwise, let a=pte.ppn_×PAGESIZE and go to step 2.
[manual:supervisor_187 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] A leaf PTE has been reached. If i>0 and pte.ppn[_i_-1:0] ≠ 0, this is a misaligned superpage; stop and raise a page-fault exception corresponding to the original access type.
[manual:supervisor_188 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] Determine if the requested memory access is allowed by the pte.u bit, given the current privilege mode and the value of the SUM and MXR fields of the mstatus register. If not, stop and raise a page-fault exception corresponding to the original access type.
[manual:supervisor_189 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] Determine if the requested memory access is allowed by the pte.r, pte.w, and pte.x bits, given the Shadow Stack Memory Protection rules. If not, stop and raise an access-fault exception.
[manual:supervisor_190 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] Determine if the requested memory access is allowed by the pte.r, pte.w, and pte.x bits. If not, stop and raise a page-fault exception corresponding to the original access type.
[manual:supervisor_191 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] If pte.a=0, or if the original memory access is a store and pte.d=0:
[manual:supervisor_192 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] If the Svade extension is implemented, stop and raise a page-fault exception corresponding to the original access type. If a store to the PTE at address _a+va.vpn[i_]×PTESIZE would violate a PMA or PMP check, raise an access-fault exception corresponding to the original access type. Perform the following steps atomically: Compare pte to the value of the PTE at address _a+va.vpn[i_]×PTESIZE. If the values match, set pte.a to 1 and, if the original memory access is a store, also set pte.d to 1. Then store pte to the PTE at address _a+va.vpn[i_]×PTESIZE. If the comparison fails, return to step 2.
[manual:supervisor_193 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] The translation is successful. The translated physical address is given as follows: pa.pgoff = va.pgoff. If i>0, then this is a superpage translation and _pa.ppn[i-1:0] = va.vpn[i_-1:0]. pa.ppn[LEVELS-1:_i_] = pte.ppn[LEVELS-1:_i_].
[manual:supervisor_194 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] All implicit accesses to the address-translation data structures in this algorithm are performed using width PTESIZE.
[manual:supervisor_195 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] This implies, for example, that an Sv48 implementation may not use two separate 4{nbsp}B reads to non-atomically access a single 8{nbsp}B PTE, and that A/D bit updates performed by the implementation are treated as atomically updating the entire PTE, rather than just the A and/or D bit alone (even though the PTE value does not otherwise change).
[manual:supervisor_196 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] The results of implicit address-translation reads in step 2 may be held in a read-only, incoherent address-translation cache but not shared with other harts. The address-translation cache may hold an arbitrary number of entries, including an arbitrary number of entries for the same address and ASID. Entries in the address-translation cache may then satisfy subsequent step 2 reads if the ASID associated with the entry matches the ASID loaded in step 0 or if the entry is associated with a global mapping. To ensure that implicit reads observe writes to the same memory locations, an SFENCE.VMA instruction must be executed after the writes to flush the relevant cached translations.
[manual:supervisor_197 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] The address-translation cache cannot be used in step 9; accessed and dirty bits may only be updated in memory directly.
[manual:supervisor_198 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] It is permitted for multiple address-translation cache entries to co-exist for the same address. This represents the fact that in a conventional TLB hierarchy, it is possible for multiple entries to match a single address if, for example, a page is upgraded to a superpage without first clearing the original non-leaf PTE’s valid bit and executing an SFENCE.VMA with rs1=x0, or if multiple TLBs exist in parallel at a given level of the hierarchy. In this case, just as if an SFENCE.VMA is not executed between a write to the memory-management tables and subsequent implicit read of the same address: it is unpredictable whether the old non-leaf PTE or the new leaf PTE is used, but the behavior is otherwise well defined.
[manual:supervisor_199 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] Implementations may also execute the address-translation algorithm speculatively at any time, for any virtual address, as long as satp is active (as defined in ). Such speculative executions have the effect of pre-populating the address-translation cache.
[manual:supervisor_200 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] Speculative executions of the address-translation algorithm behave as non-speculative executions of the algorithm do, except that they must not set the dirty bit for a PTE, they must not trigger an exception, and they must not create address-translation cache entries if those entries would have been invalidated by any SFENCE.VMA instruction executed by the hart since the speculative execution of the algorithm began.
[manual:supervisor_201 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] For instance, it is illegal for both non-speculative and speculative executions of the translation algorithm to begin, read the level 2 page table, pause while the hart executes an SFENCE.VMA with rs1=rs2=x0, then resume using the now-stale level 2 PTE, as subsequent implicit reads could populate the address-translation cache with stale PTEs.
[manual:supervisor_202 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] In many implementations, an SFENCE.VMA instruction with rs1=x0 will therefore either terminate all previously-launched speculative executions of the address-translation algorithm (for the specified ASID, if applicable), or simply wait for them to complete (in which case any address-translation cache entries created will be invalidated by the SFENCE.VMA as appropriate). Likewise, an SFENCE.VMA instruction with _rs1_≠`x0` generally must either ensure that previously-launched speculative executions of the address-translation algorithm (for the specified ASID, if applicable) are prevented from creating new address-translation cache entries mapping leaf PTEs, or wait for them to complete.
[manual:supervisor_203 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] A consequence of implementations being permitted to read the translation data structures arbitrarily early and speculatively is that at any time, all page table entries reachable by executing the algorithm may be loaded into the address-translation cache.
[manual:supervisor_204 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] Although it would be uncommon to place page tables in non-idempotent memory, there is no explicit prohibition against doing so. Since the algorithm may only touch page tables reachable from the root page table indicated in satp, the range of addresses that an implementation's page-table walker will touch is fully under supervisor control.
[manual:supervisor_205 · Supervisor › Virtual Address Translation Process] The algorithm does not admit the possibility of ignoring high-order PPN bits for implementations with narrower physical addresses.
[manual:supervisor_206 · Supervisor › Sv39: Page-Based 39-bit Virtual-Memory System] This section describes a simple paged virtual-memory system for SXLEN=64, which supports 39-bit virtual address spaces. The design of Sv39 follows the overall scheme of Sv32, and this section details only the differences between the schemes.
[manual:supervisor_207 · Supervisor › Sv39: Page-Based 39-bit Virtual-Memory System] We specified multiple virtual memory systems for RV64 to relieve the tension between providing a large address space and minimizing address-translation cost. For many systems, 39 bits of virtual-address space is ample, and so Sv39 suffices. Sv48 increases the virtual address space to 48 bits, but increases the physical memory capacity dedicated to page tables, the latency of page-table traversals, and the size of hardware structures that store virtual addresses. Sv57 increases the virtual address space, page table capacity requirement, and translation latency even further.
[manual:supervisor_208 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] Sv39 implementations support a 39-bit virtual address space, divided into 4 KiB pages. An Sv39 address is partitioned as shown in. Instruction fetch addresses and load and store effective addresses, which are 64 bits, must have bits 63–39 all equal to bit 38, or else a page-fault exception will occur. The 27-bit VPN is translated into a 44-bit PPN via a three-level page table, while the 12-bit page offset is untranslated.
[manual:supervisor_209 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] When mapping between narrower and wider addresses, RISC-V zero-extends a narrower physical address to a wider size. The mapping between 64-bit virtual addresses and the 39-bit usable address space of Sv39 is not based on zero extension but instead follows an entrenched convention that allows an OS to use one or a few of the most-significant bits of a full-size (64-bit) virtual address to quickly distinguish user and supervisor address regions.
[manual:supervisor_210 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] Sv39 page tables contain 2^9^ page table entries (PTEs), eight bytes each. A page table is exactly the size of a page and must always be aligned to a page boundary. The physical page number of the root page table is stored in the satp register's PPN field.
[manual:supervisor_211 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] The PTE format for Sv39 is shown in. Bits 9-0 have the same meaning as for Sv32. Bit 63 is reserved for use by the extlink:svnapot[] extension. If Svnapot is not implemented, bit 63 remains reserved and must be zeroed by software for forward compatibility, or else a page-fault exception is raised. Bits 62-61 are reserved for use by the extlink:svpbmt[] extension. If Svpbmt is not implemented, bits 62-61 remain reserved and must be zeroed by software for forward compatibility, or else a page-fault exception is raised. Bits 60-54 are reserved for future standard use and, until their use is defined by some standard extension, must be zeroed by software for forward compatibility. If any of these bits are set, a page-fault exception is raised.
[manual:supervisor_212 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] We reserved several PTE bits for a possible extension that improves support for sparse address spaces by allowing page-table levels to be skipped, reducing memory usage and TLB refill latency. These reserved bits may also be used to facilitate research experimentation. The cost is reducing the physical address space, but 56 bits is presently ample. When it no longer suffices, the reserved bits that remain unallocated could be used to expand the physical address space.
[manual:supervisor_213 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] Any level of PTE may be a leaf PTE, so in addition to 4 KiB pages, Sv39 supports 2 MiB megapages and 1 GiB gigapages, each of which must be virtually and physically aligned to a boundary equal to its size. A page-fault exception is raised if the physical address is insufficiently aligned.
[manual:supervisor_214 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] The algorithm for virtual-to-physical address translation is the same as in, except LEVELS equals 3 and PTESIZE equals 8.
[manual:supervisor_215 · Supervisor › Sv48: Page-Based 48-bit Virtual-Memory System] This section describes a simple paged virtual-memory system for SXLEN=64, which supports 48-bit virtual address spaces. Sv48 is intended for systems for which a 39-bit virtual address space is insufficient. It closely follows the design of Sv39, simply adding an additional level of page table, and so this chapter only details the differences between the two schemes.
[manual:supervisor_216 · Supervisor › Sv48: Page-Based 48-bit Virtual-Memory System] Implementations that support Sv48 must also support Sv39.
[manual:supervisor_217 · Supervisor › Sv48: Page-Based 48-bit Virtual-Memory System] Systems that support Sv48 can also support Sv39 at essentially no cost, and so should do so to maintain compatibility with supervisor software that assumes Sv39.
[manual:supervisor_218 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] Sv48 implementations support a 48-bit virtual address space, divided into 4 KiB pages. An Sv48 address is partitioned as shown in. Instruction fetch addresses and load and store effective addresses, which are 64 bits, must have bits 63–48 all equal to bit 47, or else a page-fault exception will occur. The 36-bit VPN is translated into a 44-bit PPN via a four-level page table, while the 12-bit page offset is untranslated.
[manual:supervisor_219 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] The PTE format for Sv48 is shown in. Bits 63-54 and 9-0 have the same meaning as for Sv39. Any level of PTE may be a leaf PTE, so in addition to 4 KiB pages, Sv48 supports 2 MiB megapages, 1 GiB gigapages, and 512 GiB terapages, each of which must be virtually and physically aligned to a boundary equal to its size. A page-fault exception is raised if the physical address is insufficiently aligned.
[manual:supervisor_220 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] The algorithm for virtual-to-physical address translation is the same as in, except LEVELS equals 4 and PTESIZE equals 8.
[manual:supervisor_221 · Supervisor › Sv57: Page-Based 57-bit Virtual-Memory System] This section describes a simple paged virtual-memory system designed for RV64 systems, which supports 57-bit virtual address spaces. Sv57 is intended for systems for which a 48-bit virtual address space is insufficient. It closely follows the design of Sv48, simply adding an additional level of page table, and so this chapter only details the differences between the two schemes.
[manual:supervisor_222 · Supervisor › Sv57: Page-Based 57-bit Virtual-Memory System] Implementations that support Sv57 must also support Sv48.
[manual:supervisor_223 · Supervisor › Sv57: Page-Based 57-bit Virtual-Memory System] Systems that support Sv57 can also support Sv48 at essentially no cost, and so should do so to maintain compatibility with supervisor software that assumes Sv48.
[manual:supervisor_224 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] Sv57 implementations support a 57-bit virtual address space, divided into 4 KiB pages. An Sv57 address is partitioned as shown in. Instruction fetch addresses and load and store effective addresses, which are 64 bits, must have bits 63–57 all equal to bit 56, or else a page-fault exception will occur. The 45-bit VPN is translated into a 44-bit PPN via a five-level page table, while the 12-bit page offset is untranslated.
[manual:supervisor_225 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] The PTE format for Sv57 is shown in. Bits 63–54 and 9–0 have the same meaning as for Sv39. Any level of PTE may be a leaf PTE, so in addition to 4 KiB pages, Sv57 supports 2 MiB megapages, 1 GiB gigapages, 512 GiB terapages, and 256 TiB petapages, each of which must be virtually and physically aligned to a boundary equal to its size. A page-fault exception is raised if the physical address is insufficiently aligned.
[manual:supervisor_226 · Supervisor › Addressing and Memory Protection] The algorithm for virtual-to-physical address translation is the same as in, except LEVELS equals 5 and PTESIZE equals 8.
[manual:csrs_0 · Control and Status Registers (CSRs)] The SYSTEM major opcode is used to encode all privileged instructions in the RISC-V ISA. These can be divided into two main classes: those that atomically read-modify-write control and status registers (CSRs), which are defined in the ZICSR extension, and all other privileged instructions. The privileged architecture requires the ZICSR extension; which other privileged instructions are required depends on the privileged-architecture feature set.
[manual:csrs_1 · Control and Status Registers (CSRs)] In addition to the unprivileged state described in Volume I of this manual, an implementation may contain additional CSRs, accessible by some subset of the privilege levels using the CSR instructions described in extlink:zicsr[]. In this chapter, we map out the CSR address space. The following chapters describe the function of each of the CSRs according to privilege level, as well as the other privileged instructions which are generally closely associated with a particular privilege level. Note that although CSRs and instructions are associated with one privilege level, they are also accessible at all higher privilege levels.
[manual:csrs_2 · Control and Status Registers (CSRs)] Standard CSRs do not have side effects on reads but may have side effects on writes.
[manual:csrs_3 · Csrs › CSR Address Mapping Conventions] The standard RISC-V ISA sets aside a 12-bit encoding space (csr[11:0]) for up to 4,096 CSRs. By convention, the upper qty:4[bits] of the CSR address (csr[11:8]) are used to encode the read and write accessibility of the CSRs according to privilege level as shown in. The top two bits (csr[11:10]) indicate whether the register is read/write (00,01, or 10) or read-only (11). The next two bits (csr[9:8]) encode the lowest privilege level that can access the CSR, with the pattern 10 representing hypervisor CSRs.
[manual:csrs_4 · Csrs › CSR Address Mapping Conventions] The CSR address convention uses the upper bits of the CSR address to encode default access privileges. This simplifies error checking in the hardware and provides a larger CSR space, but does constrain the mapping of CSRs into the address space.
[manual:csrs_5 · Csrs › CSR Address Mapping Conventions] Implementations might allow a more-privileged level to trap otherwise permitted CSR accesses by a less-privileged level to allow these accesses to be intercepted. This change should be transparent to the less-privileged software.
[manual:csrs_6 · Csrs › CSR Address Mapping Conventions] Instructions that access a non-existent CSR are reserved. Attempts to access a CSR without appropriate privilege level raise illegal-instruction exceptions or, as described in, virtual-instruction exceptions. Attempts to write a read-only register raise illegal-instruction exceptions. A read/write register might also contain some bits that are read-only, in which case writes to the read-only bits are ignored.
[manual:csrs_7 · Csrs › CSR Address Mapping Conventions] also indicates the convention to allocate CSR addresses between standard and custom uses. The CSR addresses designated for custom uses will not be redefined by future standard extensions.
[manual:csrs_8 · Csrs › CSR Address Mapping Conventions] Machine-mode standard read-write CSRs 0x7A0{endash}`0x7BF are reserved for use by the debug system. Of these CSRs, 0x7A0{endash}0x7AF are accessible to machine mode, whereas 0x7B0{endash}0x7BF` are only visible to debug mode. Implementations should raise illegal-instruction exceptions on machine-mode access to the latter set of registers.
[manual:csrs_9 · Csrs › CSR Address Mapping Conventions] Effective virtualization requires that as many instructions run natively as possible inside a virtualized environment, while any privileged accesses trap to the virtual machine monitor. CSRs that are read-only at some lower privilege level are shadowed into separate CSR addresses if they are made read-write at a higher privilege level. This avoids trapping permitted lower-privilege accesses while still causing traps on illegal accesses. Currently, the counters are the only shadowed CSRs.
[manual:csrs_10 · Csrs › CSR Listing] {endash} list the CSRs that have currently been allocated CSR addresses. The timers, counters, and floating-point CSRs are standard unprivileged CSRs. The other registers are used by privileged code, as described in the following chapters. Note that not all registers are required on all implementations.
[manual:csrs_11 · Csrs › Currently allocated RISC-V hypervisor and VS CSR addresses] .Currently allocated RISC-V hypervisor and VS CSR addresses
[manual:csrs_12 · Csrs › Currently allocated RISC-V indirect CSR (SMCSRIND) mappings] .Currently allocated RISC-V indirect CSR (SMCSRIND) mappings - M-mode [float="center",align="center",options="header"]
[manual:csrs_13 · Csrs › Currently allocated RISC-V indirect CSR (SMCSRIND) mappings] .Currently allocated RISC-V indirect CSR (SMCSRIND/SSCSRIND) mappings - S-mode [float="center",align="center",options="header"]
[manual:csrs_14 · Csrs › Currently allocated RISC-V indirect CSR (SMCSRIND) mappings] .Currently allocated RISC-V indirect CSR (Smcsrind/Sscsrind) mappings - VS-mode [float="center",align="center",options="header"]
[manual:csrs_15 · Csrs › CSR Field Specifications] The following definitions and abbreviations are used in specifying the behavior of fields within the CSRs.
[manual:csrs_16 · Csrs › Reserved Writes Preserve Values, Reads Ignore Values (WPRI)] Some whole read/write fields are reserved for future use. Software should ignore the values read from these fields, and should preserve the values held in these fields when writing values to other fields of the same register. For forward compatibility, implementations that do not furnish these fields must make them read-only zero. These fields are labeled WPRI in the register descriptions.
[manual:csrs_17 · Csrs › Reserved Writes Preserve Values, Reads Ignore Values (WPRI)] To simplify the software model, any backward-compatible future definition of previously reserved fields within a CSR must cope with the possibility that a non-atomic read/modify/write sequence is used to update other fields in the CSR. Alternatively, the original CSR definition must specify that subfields can only be updated atomically, which may require a two-instruction clear bit/set bit sequence in general that can be problematic if intermediate values are not legal.
[manual:csrs_18 · Csrs › Write/Read Only Legal Values (WLRL)] Some read/write CSR fields specify behavior for only a subset of possible bit encodings, with other bit encodings reserved. Software should not write anything other than legal values to such a field, and should not assume a read will return a legal value unless the last write was of a legal value, or the register has not been written since another operation (e.g., reset) set the register to a legal value. These fields are labeled WLRL in the register descriptions.
[manual:csrs_19 · Csrs › Write/Read Only Legal Values (WLRL)] Hardware implementations need only implement enough state bits to differentiate between the supported values, but must always return the complete specified bit-encoding of any supported value when read.
[manual:csrs_20 · Csrs › Write/Read Only Legal Values (WLRL)] Implementations are permitted but not required to raise an illegal-instruction exception if an instruction attempts to write a non-supported value to a WLRL field. Implementations can return arbitrary bit patterns on the read of a WLRL field when the last write was of an illegal value, but the value returned should deterministically depend on the illegal written value and the value of the field prior to the write.
[manual:csrs_21 · Csrs › Write Any Values, Reads Legal Values (WARL)] Some read/write CSR fields are only defined for a subset of bit encodings, but allow any value to be written while guaranteeing to return a legal value whenever read. Assuming that writing the CSR has no other side effects, the range of supported values can be determined by attempting to write a desired setting then reading to see if the value was retained. These fields are labeled WARL in the register descriptions.
[manual:csrs_22 · Csrs › Write Any Values, Reads Legal Values (WARL)] Implementations will not raise an exception on writes of unsupported values to a WARL field. Implementations can return any legal value on the read of a WARL field when the last write was of an illegal value, but the legal value returned should deterministically depend on the illegal written value and the architectural state of the hart.
[manual:csrs_23 · Csrs › CSR Field Modulation] If a write to one CSR changes the set of legal values allowed for a field of a second CSR, then unless specified otherwise, the second CSR's field immediately gets an UNSPECIFIED value from among its new legal values. This is true even if the field's value before the write remains legal after the write; the value of the field may be changed in consequence of the write to the controlling CSR.
[manual:csrs_24 · Csrs › CSR Field Modulation] As a special case of this rule, the value written to one CSR may control whether a field of a second CSR is writable (with multiple legal values) or is read-only. When a write to the controlling CSR causes the second CSR's field to change from previously read-only to now writable, that field immediately gets an UNSPECIFIED but legal value, unless specified otherwise.
[manual:csrs_25 · Csrs › CSR Field Modulation] *** Some CSR fields are, when writable, defined as aliases of other CSR fields. Let x be such a CSR field, and let y be the CSR field it aliases when writable. If a write to a controlling CSR causes field x to change from previously read-only to now writable, the new value of x is not UNSPECIFIED but instead immediately reflects the existing value of its alias y, as required.
[manual:csrs_26 · Csrs › CSR Field Modulation] A change to the value of a CSR for this reason is not a write to the affected CSR and thus does not trigger any side effects specified for that CSR.
[manual:csrs_27 · Csrs › Implicit Reads of CSRs] Implementations sometimes perform implicit reads of CSRs. (For example, all S-mode instruction fetches implicitly read the satp CSR.) Unless otherwise specified, the value returned by an implicit read of a CSR is the same value that would have been returned by an explicit read of the CSR, using a CSR-access instruction in a sufficient privilege mode.
[manual:csrs_28 · Csrs › CSR Width Modulation] If the width of a CSR is changed (for example, by changing SXLEN or UXLEN, as described in ), the values of the writable fields and bits of the new-width CSR are, unless specified otherwise, determined from the previous-width CSR as though by this algorithm:
[manual:csrs_29 · Csrs › CSR Width Modulation] The value of the previous-width CSR is copied to a temporary register of the same width. For the read-only bits of the previous-width CSR, the bits at the same positions in the temporary register are set to zeros. The width of the temporary register is changed to the new width. If the new width W is narrower than the previous width, the least-significant W bits of the temporary register are retained and the more-significant bits are discarded. If the new width is wider than the previous width, the temporary register is zero-extended to the wider width. Each writable field of the new-width CSR takes the value of the bits at the same positions in the temporary register.
[manual:csrs_30 · Csrs › CSR Width Modulation] Changing the width of a CSR is not a read or write of the CSR and thus does not trigger any side effects.
[manual:csrs_31 · Csrs › Explicit Accesses to CSRs Wider than XLEN] If a standard CSR is wider than XLEN bits, then an explicit read of the CSR returns the register's least-significant XLEN bits, and an explicit write to the CSR modifies only the register's least-significant XLEN bits, leaving the upper bits unchanged.
[manual:csrs_32 · Csrs › Explicit Accesses to CSRs Wider than XLEN] Some standard CSRs, such as the counter CSRs of extension ZICNTR, are always 64-bit, even when XLEN=32 (RV32). For each such 64-bit CSR (for example, counter time), a corresponding 32-bit high-half CSR is usually defined with the same name but with the letter 'h' appended at the end (timeh). The high-half CSR aliases bits 63:32 of its namesake 64-bit CSR, thus providing a way for RV32 software to read and modify the otherwise-unreachable qty:32[bits].
[manual:csrs_33 · Csrs › Explicit Accesses to CSRs Wider than XLEN] Standard high-half CSRs are accessible only when the base RISC-V instruction set is RV32 (XLEN=32). For RV64 (when XLEN=64), the addresses of all standard high-half CSRs are reserved, so an attempt to access a high-half CSR typically raises an illegal-instruction exception.
